At once, good night:Stand not upon the order of your going,But go at once.Though you untie the winds and let them fightAgainst the churches;though the yesty wavesConfound and swallow navigation up;Though bladed corn be lodged and trees blown down;Though castles topple on their warders’ heads;Though palaces and pyramids do slopeTheir heads to their foundations;though the treasureOf nature’s germens tumble all together,Even till destruction sicken;answer me…Show his eyes, and grieve his heart;Come like shadows, so depart!Out, damned spot!Out, I say!Hang out our banners on the outward walls;The cry is still ‘They come:’Ring the alarum-bell!Blow, wind!Come, wrack!At least we’ll die with harness on our back.Get thee to a nunnery:why wouldst thou be a breeder of sinners?Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool no where but in’s own house.Come, come, and sit you down;you shall not budge;You go not till I set you up a glassWhere you may see the inmost part of you.Leave wringing of your hands:peace!Sit you down,And let me wring your heart;for so I shall,If it be made of penetrable stuff,O, step between her and her fighting soul:Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works:O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.O, throw away the worser part of it,And live the purer with the other half.Assume a virtue, if you have it not.Lay her i’ the earth:And from her fair and unpolluted fleshMay violets spring!I tell thee, churlish priest,A ministering angel shall my sister be,When thou liest howling. Be buried quick with her, and so will I:Go, bid the soldiers shoot.Blow, winds, and crack your cheeks!Rage!Blow!You cataracts and hurricanoes, spoutTill you have drench’d our steeples, drown’d the cocks!You sulphurous and thought-executing fires,Vaunt-couriers to oak-cleaving thunderbolts,Singe my white head!And thou, all-shaking thunder,Smite flat the thick rotundity o’ the world!Crack nature’s moulds, an germens spill at once,That make ingrateful man!Put out the light, and then put out the light:If I quench thee, thou flaming minister,I can again thy former light restore,Should I repent me:but once put out thy light,Thou cunning’st pattern of excelling nature,I know not where is that Promethean heatThat can thy light relume.O sun,Burn the great sphere thou movest in!Darkling standThe varying shore o’ the world.With thy sharp teeth this knot intrinsicateOf life at once untie:No more be grieved at that which thou hast done:Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud;Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.Be wise as thou art cruel;do not pressMy tongue-tied patience with too much disdain;O, I have sufferedWith those that I saw sufferO, the cry did knock against my very heart!The direful spectacle of the wreck, which touch’dThe very virtue of compassion in theeI would the lightning hadBurnt up those logs that you are enjoin’d to pile!Pray, set it down and rest you:when this burns,‘Twill weep for having wearied you.Your charm so strongly works ‘emThat if you now beheld them, your affectionsWould become tender.Dost thou think so, spirit?Mine would, sir, were I human.I am sorry for thee:thou art come to answerA stony adversary, an inhuman wretchUncapable of pity, void and emptyFrom any dram of mercy.The quality of mercy is not strain’d,It droppeth as the gentle rain from heavenUpon the place beneath:I have forgiven and forgotten all;O, the most piteous cry of the poor souls! Sometimes to see ‘em, and not to see ‘em; now the ship boring the moon with her main-mast, and anon swallowed with yeast and froth, as you’d thrust a cork into a hogshead.He hath a tear for pity and a handOpen as day for melting charity:Wilt thou draw near the nature of the gods?Draw near them then in being merciful:Sweet mercy is nobility’s true badge:Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.…Yet do I fear thy nature;It is too full o’ the milk of human kindnessTo catch the nearest way:thou wouldst be great;Art not without ambition, but withoutThe illness should attend it:what thou wouldst highly,That wouldst thou holily;wouldst not play false,And yet wouldst wrongly win:What if this cursed handWere thicker than itself with brother’s blood,Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavensTo wash it white as snow?Whereto serves mercyBut to confront the visage of offence?I must be cruel, only to be kind:O, reason not the need:Is there any cause in nature that makes these hard hearts?…Mine enemy’s dog,Though he had bit me, should have stood that nightAgainst my fire;Pray you now, forget and forgive:She loved me for the dangers I had pass’d,And I loved her that she did pity them.This only is the witchcraft I have used:…but yet the pity of it, Iago!O Iago, the pity of it, Iago!…but if there beYet left in heaven as small a drop of pityAs a wren’s eye, fear’d gods, a part of it!Pardon’s the word to all.There’s nothing ill can dwell in such a temple:If the ill spirit have so fair a house,Good things will strive to dwell with’t.To the most of men this is a CalibanAnd they to him are angels.My affectionsAre then most humble;I have no ambitionTo see a goodlier man.He misses not much.No;he doth but mistake the truth totally.You are gentlemen of brave mettle;you would liftthe moon out of her sphere, if she would continuein it five weeks without changing.…this lord of weak remembranceThough thou canst swim like aduck, thou art made like a goose.That’s a brave god and bears celestial liquor.…but you, O you,So perfect and so peerless, are createdOf every creature’s best!They say there’s but five upon this isle:we are threeof them;if th’ other two be brained like us, thestate totters.Who though they are of monstrous shape, yet, note,Their manners are more gentle-kind than ofOur human generation you shall findMany, nay, almost any....a grace it had, devouring.So rare a wonder’d father and a wiseMakes this place Paradise.A devil, a born devil, on whose natureNurture can never stick;on whom my pains,Humanely taken, all, all lost, quite lost;O, wonder!How many goodly creatures are there here!How beauteous mankind is!O brave new world,That has such people in’t!‘Tis new to thee.Why, man, she is mine own,And I as rich in having such a jewelAs twenty seas, if all their sand were pearl,The water nectar and the rocks pure gold.Thou subtle, perjured, false, disloyal man!There is Anne Page, which is daughter to Master ThomasPage, which is pretty virginity.Thou art the Mars of malcontents:I second thee;troop on.Come, I cannot cog and say thou art this and that, like a many of these lisping hawthorn-buds, that come like women in men’s apparel, and smell like Bucklersbury in simple time;Grace is grace, despite of all controversy; as, for example, thou thyself art a wicked villain, despite of all grace.The hand that hath made you fair hath made you good:They brought one Pinch, a hungry lean-faced villain,A mere anatomy, a mountebank,A threadbare juggler and a fortune-teller,A needy, hollow-eyed, sharp-looking wretch,A dead-looking man:…he is a very valiant trencherman;What, my dear Lady Disdain! Are you yet living?Why, i’ faith, methinks she’s too low for a highpraise, too brown for a fair praise and too littlefor a great praise:She speaks poniards, and every word stabs:if her breath were as terrible as her terminations, there were no living near her;she would infect to the north star.‘There did I see that low-spirited swain, that base minnow of thy mirth,’Me? ‘…that unlettered small-knowing soul,’Me?‘…that shallow vassal,’Still me?‘…which, as I remember, hight Costard,’O, me!O happy fair!Your eyes are lode-stars;and your tongue’s sweet airMore tuneable than lark to shepherd’s ear,When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear.Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania.Get you gone, you dwarf;You minimus, of hindering knot-grass made;You bead, you acorn.If he, compact of jars, grow musical,We shall have shortly discord in the spheres.What stature is she of?Just as high as my heart.You are full of pretty answers.Have you not beenacquainted with goldsmiths’ wives, and conned themout of rings?Where dwell you, pretty youth?With this shepherdess, my sister;here in the skirts of the forest, like fringe upon a petticoat.Thou hast a lady far more beautifulThan any woman in this waning age.Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her.You lie, in faith;for you are call’d plain Kate,And bonny Kate and sometimes Kate the curst;But Kate, the prettiest Kate in ChristendomKate of Kate Hall, my super-dainty Kate,For dainties are all Kates, and therefore, Kate,Take this of me, Kate of my consolation;Hearing thy mildness praised in every town,Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded,Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs,Myself am moved to woo thee for my wife.Why does the world report that Kate doth limp?O slanderous world!Kate like the hazel-twigIs straight and slender and as brown in hueAs hazel nuts and sweeter than the kernels.No, no, no, your son was misled with a snipt-taffeta fellow there, whose villanous saffron would have made all the unbaked and doughy youth of a nation in his colour:He lost a wifeWhose beauty did astonish the surveyOf richest eyes, whose words all ears took captive,Whose dear perfection hearts that scorn’d to serveHumbly call’d mistress.Praising what is lostMakes the remembrance dear. ….he does it with a better grace, but I do it more natural.It is an heretic that makes the fire,Not she which burns in’t.What you doStill betters what is done.When you speak, sweet.I’d have you do it ever:when you sing,I’d have you buy and sell so, so give alms,Pray so;and, for the ord’ring your affairs,To sing them too:when you do dance, I wish youA wave o’ the sea, that you might ever doNothing but that;move still, still so,And own no other function:each your doing,So singular in each particular,Crowns what you are doing in the present deeds,That all your acts are queens.…too true, my lord:If, one by one, you wedded all the world,Or from the all that are took something good,To make a perfect woman, she you kill’dWould be unparallel’d.Stars, stars,And all eyes else dead coals!Ay, the most peerless piece of earth, I think,That e’er the sun shone bright on.…for she was as tenderAs infancy and grace.…every wretch, pining and pale before,Beholding him, plucks comfort from his looks:A largess universal like the sunHis liberal eye doth give to every one,Thawing cold fear, that mean and gentle all,Behold, as may unworthiness define,A little touch of Harry in the night.I, that am rudely stamp’d, and want love’s majestyTo strut before a wanton ambling nymph;I, that am curtail’d of this fair proportion,Cheated of feature by dissembling nature,Deformed, unfinish’d, sent before my timeInto this breathing world, scarce half made up,And that so lamely and unfashionableThat dogs bark at me as I halt by them;Why, I, in this weak piping time of peace,Have no delight to pass away the time,Unless to spy my shadow in the sunAnd descant on mine own deformity:A sweeter and a lovelier gentleman,Framed in the prodigality of nature,Young, valiant, wise, and, no doubt, right royal,The spacious world cannot again afford,Hear you this Triton of the minnows?Mark youHis absolute ‘shall’?That shows thee a weak slave;for the weakest goesto the wall.She will not stay the siege of loving terms,Nor bide the encounter of assailing eyes,Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold:O, she is rich in beauty, But, soft!What light through yonder window breaks?It is the east, and Juliet is the sun.Why, what is Tybalt?More than prince of cats, I can tell you. O, he is the courageous captain of compliments.A sail, a sail!Two, two;a shirt and a smock.This was the noblest Roman of them all:All the conspirators save only heDid that they did in envy of great Caesar;He only, in a general honest thoughtAnd common good to all, made one of them.His life was gentle, and the elementsSo mix’d in him that Nature might stand upAnd say to all the world ‘This was a man!’Thou art the best o’ the cut-throats;Since my dear soul was mistress of her choiceAnd could of men distinguish, her electionHath seal’d thee for herself;for thou hast beenAs one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing,A man that fortune’s buffets and rewardsHast ta’en with equal thanks:and blest are thoseWhose blood and judgment are so well commingled,That they are not a pipe for fortune’s fingerTo sound what stop she please.Give me that manThat is not passion’s slave, and I will wear himIn my heart’s core, ay, in my heart of heart,As I do thee.See, what a grace was seated on this brow;Hyperion’s curls;the front of Jove himself;An eye like Mars, to threaten and command;A station like the herald MercuryNew-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill;A combination and a form indeed,Where every god did seem to set his seal,To give the world assurance of a man:This was your husband.….Have you eyes?Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,And batten on this moor?Cordelia, Cordelia! stay a little.Ha!What is’t thou say’st?Her voice was ever soft,Gentle, and low, an excellent thing in woman.I kill’d the slave that was a-hanging thee.What wouldst thou write of me, if thou shouldstpraise me?O gentle lady, do not put me to’t;For I am nothing, if not critical.To suckle fools and chronicle small beer.I cry you mercy, then:I took you for that cunning whore of VeniceThat married with Othello. – You, mistress,That have the office opposite to Saint Peter,And keep the gate of hell!Thou art rash as fire, to sayThat she was false:O, she was heavenly true!Fie, wrangling queen!Whom every thing becomes, to chide, to laugh,To weep;whose every passion fully strivesTo make itself, in thee, fair and admired!No messenger, but thine;and all aloneTo-night we’ll wander through the streets and noteThe qualities of people.Come, my queen;The demi-Atlas of this earth, the armAnd burgonet of men.He’s speaking now,Or murmuring ‘Where’s my serpent of old Nile?’For so he calls me:now I feed myselfWith most delicious poison.I will tell you.The barge she sat in, like a burnish’d throne,Burn’d on the water:the poop was beaten gold;Purple the sails, and so perfumed thatThe winds were love-sick with them;the oars were silver,Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and madeThe water which they beat to follow faster,As amorous of their strokes.For her own person,It beggar’d all description:Age cannot wither her, nor custom staleHer infinite variety:Now boast thee, death, in thy possession liesA lass unparallel’d.Downy windows, close;And golden Phoebus never be beheldOf eyes again so royal!Your crown’s awry;I’ll mend it, and then play –All of her that is out of door most rich!If she be furnish’d with a mind so rare,She is alone the Arabian bird, and IHave lost the wager.By Jupiter, an angel!Or, if not,An earthly paragon!Behold divinenessNo elder than a boy!Falseness cannot come from thee;for thou look’stModest as Justice, and thou seem’st a palaceFor the crown’d Truth to dwell in:Thou that art now the world’s fresh ornamentAnd only herald to the gaudy spring,My mistress’ eyes are nothing like the sun;Coral is far more red than her lips’ red;For I have sworn thee fair and thought thee bright,Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.But, for your conscience?Ay, sir;where lies that? Our doubts are traitors, and make us lose the good we oft might win by fearing to attempt.…well, my conscience says ‘Launcelot, budge not.’ ‘Budge,’ says thefiend. ‘Budge not,’ says my conscience. ‘Conscience,’ say I, ‘you counsel well;’ ‘ Fiend,’ say I, ‘you counsel well:’I can no other answer make but thanks,And thanks;and ever thanks;and oft good turnsAre shuffled off with such uncurrent pay:But, were my worth as is my conscience firm,You should find better dealing.Thrice is he armed that hath his quarrel just,And he but naked, though lock’d up in steelWhose conscience with injustice is corrupted.O coward conscience, how dost thou afflict me!The lights burn blue.It is now dead midnight.Cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh.What do I fear?Myself?There’s none else by:Richard loves Richard;that is, I am I.Let not our babbling dreams affright our souls:Conscience is but a word that cowards use,Devised at first to keep the strong in awe:Our strong arms be our conscience, swords our law.March on, join bravely, let us to’t pell-mellIf not to heaven, then hand in hand to hell.…why do I yield to that suggestionWhose horrid image doth unfix my hairAnd make my seated heart knock at my ribs,Against the use of nature?Present fearsAre less than horrible imaginings:My thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical,Shakes so my single state of man that functionIs smother’d in surmise, and nothing isBut what is not.This is a sorry sight.A foolish thought, to say a sorry sight.….the play ‘s the thingWherein I’ll catch the conscience of the king.Thus conscience does make cowards of us all;And thus the native hue of resolutionIs sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought,And enterprises of great pith and momentWith this regard their currents turn awry,And lose the name of action.O Hamlet, speak no more:Thou turn’st mine eyes into my very soul;And there I see such black and grained spotsAs will not leave their tinct.O, what damned minutes tells he o’erWho dotes, yet doubts, suspects, yet strongly loves!Love is too young to know what conscience is;Yet who knows not conscience is born of love?O heaven, were manBut constant, he were perfect!That one errorFills him with faults;makes him run through all th’ sins:…he wears his faith but asthe fashion of his hat;it ever changes with thenext block.Sigh no more, ladies, sigh no more,Men were deceivers ever,One foot in sea and one on shore,To one thing constant never:You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant;But yet you draw not iron, for my heartIs true as steel:leave you your power to draw,And I shall have no power to follow you.For she is wise, if I can judge of her,And fair she is, if that mine eyes be true,And true she is, as she hath proved herself,And therefore, like herself, wise, fair and true,Shall she be placed in my constant soul.The man that hath no music in himself,Nor is not moved with concord of sweet sounds,Is fit for treasons, stratagems and spoils;The motions of his spirit are dull as nightAnd his affections dark as Erebus:Let no such man be trusted.‘Tis not the many oaths that makes the truth,But the plain single vow that is vow’d true.Prove true, imagination, O, prove true,It is requiredYou do awake your faith.Had I but served my God with half the zealI served my king, he would not in mine ageHave left me naked to mine enemies.I am as true as truth’s simplicityAnd simpler than the infancy of truth.If I profane with my unworthiest handThis holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready standTo smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.…there is no time so miserable but a man may be true.There’s no artTo find the mind’s construction in the face:He was a gentleman on whom I builtAn absolute trust.He’s here in double trust;So young, and so untender?So young, my lord, and true.Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia,The gods themselves throw incense.Have I caught thee?He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven,And fire us hence like foxes.Why did you throw your wedded lady from you?Think that you are upon a rock;and nowThrow me again.Hang there like a fruit, my soul,Till the tree die!‘Fair, kind and true’ is all my argument,‘Fair, kind, and true’ varying to other words;And in this change is my invention spent,How many cowards, whose hearts are all as falseAs stairs of sand, wear yet upon their chinsThe beards of Hercules and frowning Mars;Who, inward search’d, have livers white as milk;We’ll have a swashing and a martial outside,As many other mannish cowards haveThat do outface it with their semblances.…he’s a great quarreller: and but that he hath the gift of a coward to allay the gust he hath in quarrelling, ‘tis thought among the prudent he would quickly have the gift of a grave.….only to exasperate you; to awake your dormouse valour; to put fire in your heart and brimstone in your liver.…and assure thyself, there is no love-broker in the world can more prevail in man’s commendation with woman than report of valour.For courage mounteth with occasion:‘The purpose you undertake is dangerous;’…Why, that’s certain: ‘tis dangerous to take a cold, to sleep, to drink;but I tell you, my lord fool, out of this nettle, danger, we pluck this flower, safety.Why, thou knowest I am as valiant as Hercules: but beware instinct;the lion will not touch the true prince. Instinct is a great matter;I was now a coward on instinct.The better part of valour is discretion;in the which better part I have saved my life.….Full bravely hast thou flesh’dThy maiden sword.For Nym, he hath heard that men of few words are the best men; and therefore he scorns to say his prayers, lest a’ should be thought a coward:You may as well say, that’s a valiant flea that dare eat his breakfast on the lip of a lion.Cowards die many times before their deaths;The valiant never taste of death but once.Of all the wonders that I yet have heard.It seems to me most strange that men should fear;Seeing that death, a necessary end,Will come when it will come.…Art thou afeardTo be the same in thine own act and valourAs thou art in desire?Wouldst thou have thatWhich thou esteem’st the ornament of life,And live a coward in thine own esteem,Letting ‘I dare not’ wait upon ‘I would,’Like the poor cat i’ the adage?If we should fail?We fail!But screw your courage to the sticking-place,And we’ll not fail. This is the very painting of your fear:This is the air-drawn dagger which, you said,Led you to Duncan.O, these flaws and starts,Impostors to true fear, would well becomeA woman’s story at a winter’s fire,Fie, my lord, fie!A soldier, and afeard?I have almost forgot the taste of fears;The time has been, my senses would have cool’dTo hear a night-shriek;and my fell of hairWould at a dismal treatise rouse and stirAs life were in’t:I have supp’d full with horrors;Direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughtsCannot once start me.Why, what should be the fear?I do not set my life in a pin’s fee;And for my soul, what can it do to that,Being a thing immortal as itself?What, frighted with false fire!Now, whether it beBestial oblivion, or some craven scrupleOf thinking too precisely on the event,A thought which, quarter’d, hath but one part wisdomAnd ever three parts coward, I do not knowWhy yet I live to say ‘This thing’s to do;’Sith I have cause and will and strength and meansTo do’t.No, not so much perdition as an hairWe must not make a scarecrow of the law,Setting it up to fear the birds of prey,And let it keep one shape, till custom make itTheir perch and not their terror.The jury, passing on the prisoner’s life,May in the sworn twelve have a thief or twoGuiltier than him they try.Condemn the fault and not the actor of it!Why, every fault’s condemn’d ere it be done:Every true man’s apparel fits your thief:if it betoo little for your thief, your true man thinks itbig enough;if it be too big for your thief, yourthief thinks it little enough:Haste still pays haste, and leisure answers leisure;Like doth quit like, and Measure still for Measure.They say, best men are moulded out of faults;And, for the most, become much more the betterFor being a little bad:Where is thy master, Dromio?Is he well?No, he’s in Tartar limbo, worse than hell.A devil in an everlasting garment hath him;One whose hard heart is button’d up with steel;A fiend, a fury, pitiless and rough;A wolf, nay, worse, a fellow all in buff;A back-friend, a shoulder-clapper, one that countermandsThe passages of alleys, creeks and narrow lands;A hound that runs counter and yet draws dry-foot well;One that before the judgement carries poor souls to hell.Sir, I will pronounce your sentence:you shall fast a week with bran and water.I had rather pray a month with mutton and porridge.Either to die the death or to abjureFor ever the society of men.Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires;Know of your youth, examine well your blood,Whether, if you yield not to your father’s choice,You can endure the livery of a nun,For aye to be in shady cloister mew’d,To live a barren sister all your life,Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon.Thrice-blessed they that master so their blood,To undergo such maiden pilgrimage;But earthlier happy is the rose distill’d,Than that which withering on the virgin thornGrows, lives and dies in single blessedness.That would hang us, every mother’s son.The brain may devise laws for the blood, but a hot temper leapso’er a cold decree…truth will come to light;murder cannot be hid long;a man’s sonmay, but at the length truth will out.I am a Jew.Hath not a Jew eyes? Hath not a Jew hands, organs, dimensions, senses, affections, passions? fed with the same food, hurt with the same weapons, subject to the same diseases, healed by the same means, warmed and cooled by the same winter and summer, as a Christian is? If you prick us, do we not bleed? If you tickle us, do we not laugh? If you poison us, do we not die? And if you wrong us, shall we not revenge?A Daniel come to judgment!Yea, a Daniel!O wise young judge, how I do honour thee! For, as thou urgest justice, be assuredThou shalt have justice, more than thou desirest.Well, Time is the old justice that examines all suchoffenders, and let Time try:I’ll answer him by law:I’ll not budge an inch, boy;And do as adversaries do in law,Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.The web of our life is of a mingled yarn, good andill together:our virtues would be proud, if ourfaults whipped them not;and our crimes woulddespair, if they were not cherished by our virtues.I will prove it legitimate, sir, upon the oaths ofjudgment and reason.And they have been grand-jury-men since before Noahwas a sailor.Still you keep o’ the windy side of the law:A thousand kneesTen thousand years together, naked, fasting,Upon a barren mountain and still winterIn storm perpetual, could not move the godsTo look that way thou wert.How oft the sight of means to do ill deedsMake deeds ill done!…for we that take purses go by the moon and the seven stars, and not by Phoebus,I see a good amendment of life in thee;from prayingto purse-taking.Why, Hal, ‘tis my vocation, Hal; ‘tis no sin for aman to labour in his vocation.The breath no sooner left his father’s body,But that his wildness, mortified in him,Seem’d to die too;yea, at that very momentConsideration, like an angel, cameAnd whipp’d the offending Adam out of him,…I will weep for thee;For this revolt of thine, methinks, is likeAnother fall of man.Their faults are open:Arrest them to the answer of the law;And God acquit them of their practises!Between two horses, which doth bear him best;Between two girls, which hath the merriest eye;I have perhaps some shallow spirit of judgement;But in these nice sharp quillets of the law,Good faith, I am no wiser than a daw.The first thing we do, let’s kill all the lawyers.Nay, that I mean to do.Is not this a lamentable thing, that of the skin of an innocent lamb should be made parchment?That parchment, being scribbled o’er, should undo a man?Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind;The thief doth fear each bush an officer.Off with his head! Let’s kill him boldly, but not wrathfully;Let’s carve him as a dish fit for the gods,Not hew him as a carcass fit for hounds:Stars, hide your fires;Let not light see my black and deep desires:The eye wink at the hand;Is this a dagger I see before me,The handle toward my hand?Will all great Neptune’s ocean wash this bloodClean from my hand?No, this my hand will ratherThe multitudinous seas in incarnadine,Making the green one red.I had thought to have let in some of all professions that go the primrose way to the everlasting bonfire.Confusion now hath made his masterpiece!Most sacrilegious murder hath broke opeThe Lord’s anointed temple, and stole thenceThe life o’ the building!Where we are, there’s daggers in men’s smiles:Blood hath been shed ere now, i’ the olden time,Ere human statute purged the gentle weal;Ay, and since too, murders have been perform’dToo terrible for the ear:the times have been,That, when the brains were out, the man would die,And there an end;but now they rise again,With twenty mortal murders on their crowns,And push us from our stools…I am in bloodStepp’d in so far that, should I wade no more,Returning were as tedious as go o’er:Yet who would have thought the old man to have had so much blood in him.…foul deeds will rise,Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s eyes.Murder most foul, as in the best it is;But this most foul, strange and unnatural.O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!My tables,--meet it is I set it down,That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain;…use every man after his desert, and who should ‘scape whipping?I am myself indifferent honest;but yet I could accuse me of such things that it were better my mother had not borne me:I am very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offences at my beck than I have thoughts to put them in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act them in.What should such fellows as I do crawling between earth and heaven?We are arrant knaves, all;believe none of us.Marry, this is miching mallecho;it means mischief.Now might I do it pat, now he is praying;Such an actThat blurs the grace and blush of modesty,Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the roseFrom the fair forehead of an innocent loveAnd sets a blister there, makes marriage-vowsAs false as dicers’ oaths:…I am a manMore sinn’d against than sinning.Through tatter’d clothes small vices do appear;Robes and furr’d gowns hide all.The gods are just, and of our pleasant vicesMake instruments to plague us:Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?The world’s a huge thing:it is a great price for a small vice.It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul,--Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars!--It is the cause.Yet I’ll not shed her blood;Nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow,And smooth as monumental alabaster.Yet she must die, else she’ll betray more men.…O ill-starr’d wench!Pale as thy smock!When we shall meet at compt,This look of thine will hurl my soul from heaven,And fiends will snatch at it.Cold, cold, my girl!Even like thy chastity.O cursed, cursed slave!Whip me, ye devils,From the possession of this heavenly sight!Blow me about in winds!Roast me in sulphur!Wash me in steep-down gulfs of liquid fire!O Desdemona!Desdemona!Dead!O!O!…and even but now he spake,After long seeming dead, Iago hurt him,Iago set him on.Help, master, help!Here’s a fish hangs in the net, like a poor man’s right in the law; ‘twill hardly come out.Stand fast, good Fate, to his hanging:make the rope of his destiny our cable, for our own doth little advantage.If he be not born to be hanged, our case is miserable.Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea for an acre of barren ground, long heath, brown furze, any thing.The wills above be done, but I would fain die a dry death.He that dies pays all debts.A man I am cross’d with adversity;Be absolute for death;either death or lifeShall thereby be the sweeter.Reason thus with life:If I do lose thee, I do lose a thingThat none but fools would keep.If I must die,I will encounter darkness as a bride,And hug it in mine arms.Death is a fearful thing.And shamed life a hateful.Ay, but to die, and go we know not where;To lie in cold obstruction and to rot;This sensible warm motion to becomeA kneaded clod;and the delighted spiritTo bathe in fiery floods, or to resideIn thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice;To be imprison’d in the viewless winds,And blown with restless violence round aboutThe pendent world;or to be worse than worstOf those that lawless and incertain thoughtImagine howling: ‘tis too horrible!The weariest and most loathed worldly lifeThat age, ache, penury and imprisonmentCan lay on nature is a paradiseTo what we fear of death.If I must die,I will encounter darkness as a bride,And hug it in mine arms.A man that apprehends death no more dreadfully but as a drunken sleep;careless, reckless, and fearless of what’s past, present, or to come;insensible of mortality, and desperately mortal.If the old fantastical duke of dark corners had been at home, he had lived.That life is better life, past fearing death,Than that which lives to fear:No, the world must be peopled. When I said I would die a bachelor, I did not think I should live till I were married.I will live in thy heart, die in thy lap, and be buried in thy eyes;and moreover I will go with thee to thy uncle’s.Let us sit and mock the good housewife Fortune fromher wheel, that her gifts may henceforth be bestowed equally.What colour, madam!How shall I answer you?As wit and fortune will.Or as the Destinies decree.Well said:that was laid on with a trowel.I am a feather for each wind that blows:Now bless thyself:thou mettest with things dying, I with things newborn.What, like a corse?No, like a bank for love to lie and play on;Not like a corse;or if, not to be buried,But quick and in mine arms.Why do you bend such solemn brows on me?Think you I bear the shears of destiny?Have I commandment on the pulse of life?There is no sure foundation set on blood,No certain life achieved by others’ death.My liege, her earIs stopp’d with dust;O, but they say the tongues of dying menEnforce attention like deep harmony:By my troth, I care not; a man can die but onceA’ made a finer end and went away an it had been any christom child; a’ parted even just between twelve and one, even at the turning o’ the tide: for after I saw him fumble with the sheets and play with flowers and smile upon his fingers’ ends, I knew there was but one way; for his nose was as sharp as a pen, and a’ babbled of green fields.So did he turn and over Suffolk’s neckHe threw his wounded arm and kiss’d his lips;And so espoused to death, with blood he seal’dA testament of noble-ending love.Slave, I have set my life upon a cast,And I will stand the hazard of the die:Courage, man;the hurt cannot be much.No, ‘tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church-door;but ‘tis enough,’twill serve: ask for me to-morrow, and you shall find me a grave man. O, I am fortune’s fool!O, give me thy hand,One writ with me in sour misfortune’s book!I’ll bury thee in a triumphant grave;A grave?O no!A lantern, slaughter’d youth,For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makesThis vault a feasting presence full of light.Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr’d.How oft when men are at the point of deathHave they been merry!Which their keepers callA lightning before death:O, how may ICall this a lightning?O my love!My wife!Death, that hath suck’d the honey of thy breath,Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty:Why art thou yet so fair?Shall I believeThat unsubstantial death is amorous,And that the lean abhorred monster keepsThee here in dark to be his paramour?For fear of that, I still will stay with thee;And never from this palace of dim nightDepart again:here, here will I remainWith worms that are thy chamber-maids;O, hereWill I set up my everlasting rest,And shake the yoke of inauspicious starsFrom this world-wearied flesh.There is a tide in the affairs of men,Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;Omitted, all the voyage of their lifeIs bound in shallows and in miseries.On such a full sea are we now afloat;And we must take the current when it serves,Or lose our ventures.If you can look into the seeds of time,And say which grain will grow and which will not,Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fearYour favours nor your hate.….nothing in his lifeBecame him like the leaving it;he diedAs one that had been studied in his deathTo throw away the dearest thing he owed,As ‘twere a careless trifle.But yet I’ll make assurance double sure,And take a bond of fate:I will not be afraid of death and bane,Till Birnam forest come to Dunsinane.‘Out, out, thou strumpet, Fortune!All you gods,In general synod take away her power;Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven,As low as to the fiends!’Indeed this counsellorIs now most still, most secret and most grave,Who was in life a foolish prating knave.Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king, and eat of the fish that hath fed of that worm.That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once: how the knave jowls it to the ground, as if it were Cain’s jaw-bone, that did the first murder! It might be the pate of a politician, which this ass now o’er-reaches; one that would circumvent God, might it not?Alas, poor Yorick!I knew him, Horatio: a fellow of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy:Imperious Caesar, dead and turn’d to clay,Might stop a hole to keep the wind away:Sweets to the sweet:farewell!I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet’s wife;I thought thy bride-bed to have deck’d, sweet maid,And not have strew’d thy grave.There’s a divinity that shapes our ends,Rough-hew them how we will –Not a whit, we defy augury:there’s a special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, ‘tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be now; if it be not now, yet it will come: the readiness is all:Had I but time – as this fell sergeant, death,Is strict in his arrest – O, I could tell you –But let it be.O, let me kiss that hand!Let me wipe it first; it smells of mortality.The wheel is come full circle:I am here.…No, no, no life!Why should a dog, a horse, a rat, have life,And thou no breath at all?Thou’lt come no more,Never, never, never, never, never!Pray you, undo this button:thank you, sir.Do you see this?Look on her, look, her lips,Look there, look there!‘Tis destiny unshunnable, like death:Kill me to-morrow:let me live to-night!I kiss’d thee ere I kill’d thee:no way but this;Killing myself, to die upon a kiss.No:I will go seekSome ditch wherein to die;the foul’st best fitsMy latter part of life.Bid that welcomeWhich comes to punish us, and we punish itSeeming to bear it lightly. I am dying, Egypt, dying;onlyI here importune death awhile, untilOf many thousand kisses the poor lastI lay up thy lips.I am dying, Egypt, dying:Give me some wine, and let me speak a little.No, let me speak;and let me rail so high,That the false housewife Fortune break her wheel,Provoked by my offence.Finish, good lady;the bright day is done,And we are for the dark.Give me my robe, put on my crown;I haveImmortal longings in me:Here’s a few flowers;but ‘bout midnight, more:The herbs that have on them cold dew o’ the nightAre strewings fitt’st for graves.No, I will rob Tellus of her weed,To strew thy green with flowers:the yellows, blues,The purple violets, and marigolds,Shall as a carpet hang upon thy grave,While summer-days do last.Ay me! poor maid,Born in a tempest, when my mother died,This world to me is like a lasting storm,Whirring me from my friends.For he being dead, with him is beauty slain,And, beauty dead, black chaos comes again.Tired with all these, for restful death I cry,As, to behold desert a beggar born,And needy nothing trimm’d in jollity,And purest faith unhappily forsworn,No longer mourn for me when I am deadThen you shall hear the surly sullen bellGive warning to the world that I am fledFrom this vile world,So shalt thou feed on Death, that feeds on men,And Death once dead, there’s no more dying then.There is not only disgrace and dishonour in that,monster, but an infinite loss.The world is still deceived with ornament.In law, what plea so tainted and corrupt,But, being seasoned with a gracious voice,Obscures the show of evil?In religion,What damned error, but some sober browWill bless it and approve it with a text,Hiding the grossness with fair ornament?There is no vice so simple but assumesSome mark of virtue on his outward parts:Who cannot be crushed with a plot?A nest of traitors!Convey me to my bed, then to my grave:Love they to live that love and honour have.Thy ignomy sleep with thee in the grave,But not remember’d in thy epitaph!Lord, Lord, how subject we old men are to this vice of lying!Smooth runs the water where the brook is deep;And in his simple show he harbours treason.If beauty have a soul, this is not she;If souls guide vows, if vows be sanctimonies,If sanctimony be the gods’ delight,If there be rule in unity itself,This is not she.Instance, O instance! strong as Pluto’s gates;Cressid is mine, tied with the bonds of heaven:Instance, O instance! strong as heaven itself;The bonds of heaven are slipp’d, dissolved, and loosed;And with another knot, five-finger-tied,The fractions of her faith, orts of her love,The fragments, scraps, the bits and greasy relicsOf her o’er-eaten faith, are bound to Diomed.O, swear not by the moon, the inconstant moon,That monthly changes in her circled orb,Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.Why, man, he doth bestride the narrow worldLike a Colossus, and we petty menWalk under his huge legs and peep aboutTo find ourselves dishonourable graves.Men at some time are masters of their fates:The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars,But in ourselves, that we are underlings.Et tu, Brute!Then fall, Caesar.This was the most unkindest cut of all;For when the noble Caesar saw him stab,Ingratitude, more strong than traitors’ arms,Quite vanquish’d him:then burst his mighty heart;And, in his mantle muffling up his face,Even at the base of Pompey’s statua,Which all the while ran blood, great Caesar fell.O, what a fall was there, my countrymen!Then I, and you, and all of us fell down,Whilst bloody treason flourish’d over us.But ‘tis strange:And oftentimes, to win us to our harm,The instruments of darkness tell us truths,Win us with honest trifles, to betray’sIn deepest consequence.Had I but died an hour before this chance,I had lived a blessed time;for, from this instant,There ‘s nothing serious in mortality:All is but toys:renown and grace is dead;The wine of life is drawn, and the mere leesIs left this vault to brag of.…when our actions do not,Our fears do make us traitors.But cruel are the times, when we are traitorsAnd do not know ourselves, when we hold rumourFrom what we fear, yet know not what we fear,But float upon a wild and violent seaEach way and move.I shall the effect of this good lesson keep,As watchman to my heart.But, good my brother,Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven;Whiles, like a puff’d and reckless libertine,Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads,Truth’s a dog must to kennel;he must be whipped out…By heaven, I’ll know thy thoughts.You cannot, if my heart were in your hand;Nor shall not, whilst ‘tis in my custody.O Antony,Nobler than my revolt is infamous,Forgive me in thine own particular;But let the world rank me in registerA master-leaver and a fugitive:Betray’d I am:O this false soul of Egypt! this grave charm,--Whose eye beck’d forth my wars, and call’d them home;Whose bosom was my crownet, my chief end,--Like a right gipsy, hath, at fast and loose,Beguiled me to the very heart of loss.What, Eros, Eros!O,Men’s vows are women’s traitors!O, never say that I was false of heart,Though absence seem’d my flame to qualify.When my love swears that she is made of truthI do believe her, though I know she lies,…these follies are within you and shine through you like the water in an urinal, that not an eye that sees you but is a physician to comment on your malady.I pray thee, peace.I will be flesh and blood;For there was never yet philosopherThat could endure the toothache patiently,….give me leaveTo speak my mind, and I will through and throughCleanse the foul body of the infected world,If they will patiently receive my medicine.This is the very false gallop of verses: why do you infect yourself with them?…I Do come with words as medicinal as true,Honest as either, to purge him of that humourThat presses him from sleep.The labour we delight in physics pain.Let’s make us med’cines of our great revenge,To cure this deadly grief.Cure her of that.Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased,Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow,Raze out the written troubles of the brainAnd with some sweet oblivious antidoteCleanse the stuff’d bosom of that perilous stuffWhich weighs upon the heart?Therein the patientMust minister to himself.Throw physic to the dogs;I’ll none of it.Not poppy, nor mandragora,Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world,Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleepWhich thou owedst yesterday.….for her physician tells meShe hath pursued conclusions infiniteOf easy ways to die.….she is a region in Guiana, all gold and bounty.I willbe cheater to them both, and they shall beexchequers to me;they shall be my East and WestIndies, and I will trade to them both.Marry, this is the short and the long of it;you have brought her into such a canaries as ‘tis wonderful.Mortality and mercy in Vienna live in thy tongue and heart.This will last out a night in Russia,When nights are longest there:Sure, these are but imaginary wilesAnd Lapland sorcerers inhabit here.I will go on the slightest errand now to the Antipodes that you can devise to send me on; I will fetch you a tooth-picker now from the furthest inch of Asia;bring you the length of Prester John’s foot; fetch you a hair off the great Cham’s beard, do you any embassage to the Pigmies –…he hath an argosy bound to Tripolis, another to the Indies; I understand moreover, upon the Rialto, he hath a third at Mexico, a fourth for England, and other ventures he hath, squandered abroad.…a ship of rich lading wrecked on the narrow seas;the Goodwins, I think they call the place; a very dangerous flat and fatal, where the carcasses of many a tall ship lie buried,Tranio, since for the great desire I hadTo see fair Padua, nursery of arts,I am arrived for fruitful Lombardy,The pleasant garden of great Italy;And what should I do in Illyria?My brother he is in Elysium.…you are now sailed into the north of my lady’s opinion; where you will hang like an icicle on a Dutchman’s beard, unless you do redeem it by some laudable attempt either of valour or policy.…he does smile his face into more lines than is in the new map with the augmentation of the Indies:The Emperor of Russia was my father:Bohemia.The sea-coast.This England never did, nor never shall,Lie at the proud foot of a conqueror,But when it first did help to wound itself.Now these her princes are come home again,Come the three corners of the world in arms,And we shall shock them.Nought shall make us rue,If England to itself do rest but true.This royal throne of kings, this scepter’d isle,This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars,This other Eden, demi-paradise,This fortress built by Nature for herselfAgainst infection and the hand of war,This happy breed of men, this little world,This precious stone set in the silver sea,Which serves it in the office of a wall,Or as a moat defensive to a house,Against the envy of less happier lands,This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England,This land of such dear souls, this dear, dear land,Dear for her reputation through the world,Is now leased out, I die pronouncing it,Like to a tenement or pelting farm:England, bound in with the triumphant seaWhose rocky shore beats back the envious siegeOf watery Neptune, is now bound in with shame,With inky blots and rotten parchment bonds:That England, that was wont to conquer others,Hath made a shameful conquest of itself.And sigh’d my English breath in foreign clouds,Eating the bitter bread of banishment;…but it was always yet the trick of our English nation, ifthey have a good thing, to make it too common.There is a world elsewhere.O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!It seems she hangs upon the cheek of nightLike a rich jewel in an Ethiope’s ear;Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!Stands Scotland where it did?Alas, poor country!Almost afraid to know itself.It cannotBe call’d our mother, but our graveAll the perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand.Such was the very armour he had onWhen he the ambitious Norway combated;So frown’d he once, when, in an angry parle,He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.….it was the very day that young Hamlet was born;he that is mad, and sent into England.Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?Why, because he was mad:he shall recover his wits there;or, if he do not, it’s no great matter there.Why?‘Twill, a not be seen in him there;there the men are as mad as he.Goose, if I had you upon Sarum plain,I’d drive ye cackling home to Camelot.Once more, well met at Cyprus.Like to the Pontic sea,Whose icy current and compulsive courseNe’er feels retiring ebb, but keeps due onTo the Propontic and the Hellespont,Let Rome in Tiber melt, and the wide archOf the ranged empire fall!Here is my space.Britain is a world by itself;The natural bravery of your isle, which standsAs Neptune’s park, ribbed and paled inWith rocks unscalable and roaring waters,With sands that will not bear your enemies’ boats,But suck them up to the topmast.A kind of conquestCaesar made here;but made not here his bragOf ‘Came, and saw and overcame’Hath Britain all the sun that shines?Day, night,Are they not but in Britain?I’ the world’s volumeOur Britain seems as of it, but not in ‘t;In a great pool a swan’s nest:prithee, thinkThere’s livers out of Britain.Might I but through my prison once a dayBehold this maid:all corners else o’ the earthLet liberty make use of;space enoughHave I in such a prison.Thou shalt be as freeAs mountain winds:Why, that’s my dainty Ariel!I shall miss thee:But yet thou shalt have freedom…then to the elementsBe free, and fare thou well!Now I wantSpirits to enforce, art to enchant,And my ending is despair,Unless I be relieved by prayer,Which pierces so that it assaultsMercy itself and frees all faults.As you from crimes would pardon’d be,Let your indulgence set me free.A man is master of his liberty:Time is their master, and, when they see time,They’ll go or come.I am trusted with a muzzle and enfranchised with a clog; therefore I have decreed not to sing in my cage. If I had my mouth, I would bite;if I had my liberty, I would do my liking: in the meantime let me be that I am and seek not to alter me.A daughter, and a goodly babe,Lusty and like to live:the queen receivesMuch comfort in’t;says ‘My poor prisoner,I am innocent as you.’This child was prisoner to the womb and isBy law and process of great nature thenceFreed and enfranchised,I have been studying how I may compareThis prison where I live unto the world:And for because the world is populousAnd here is not a creature but myself,I cannot do it;I would have thee gone:And yet no further than a wanton’s bird;Who lets it hop a little from her hand,Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,And with a silk thread plucks it back again,So loving-jealous of his liberty.I had else been perfect,Whole as the marble, founded as the rock,As broad and general as the casing air:But now I am cabin’d, cribb’d, confined, bound inTo saucy doubts and fears.They have tied me to a stake;I cannot fly,But, bear-like, I must fight the course.But that I am forbidTo tell the secrets of my prison-house,I could a tale unfold whose lightest wordWould harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres,Thy knotted and combined locks to partAnd each particular hair to stand on end,Like quills upon the fretful porpentine:Denmark’s a prison.Then is the world one.A goodly one;in which there are many confines, wards and dungeons, Denmark being one o’ the worst.We think not so, my lord.Why, then, ‘tis none to you; for there is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so: to me it is a prison.O wretched state!O bosom black as death!O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,Art more engaged!No, no, no, no!Come, let’s away to prison:We two alone will sing like birds i’ the cage:When thou dost ask me blessing, I’ll kneel down,And ask of thee forgiveness:so we’ll live,And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laughAt gilded butterflies, and hear poor roguesTalk of court news;and we’ll talk with them too,Who loses and who wins;who’s in, who’s out;And take upon’s the mystery of things,As if we were God’s spies:and we’ll wear out,In a wall’d prison, packs and sects of great ones,That ebb and flow by the moon.I had rather be a toad,And live upon the vapour of a dungeon,Than keep a corner in the thing I loveFor others’ uses.Make not your thoughts your prisons:He brings me liberty.My resolution’s placed, and I have nothingOf woman in me:now from head to footI am marble-constant;now the fleeting moonNo planet is of mine.…our cageWe make a choir, as doth the prison’d bird,And sing our bondage freely.Friendship is constant in all other thingsSave in the office and affairs of love:O, is it all forgot?All school-days’ friendship, childhood innocence?We, Hermia, like two artificial gods,Have with our needles created both one flower,Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion,Both warbling of one song, both in one key,As if our hands, our sides, voices and minds,Had been incorporate.So we grow together,Like to a double cherry, seeming parted,But yet an union in partition;Two lovely berries moulded on one stem;So, with two seeming bodies, but one heart;Give me your hands, if we be friends,And Robin shall restore amends.I was too young that time to value her;But now I know her.If she be a traitor,Why so am I:we still have slept together,Rose at an instant, learn’d, play’d, eat together,And wheresoe’er we went, like Juno’s swans,Still we went coupled and inseparable.Oft our displeasures, to ourselves unjust,Destroy our friends and after weep their dustOur own love waking cries to see what’s done,While shame full late sleeps out the afternoon.Ceremony was but devised at firstTo set a gloss on faint deeds, hollow welcomes,Recanting goodness, sorry ere ‘tis shown;But where there is true friendship, there needs none.A friend should bear his friend’s infirmities,But, in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at Elsinore?To his good friends thus wide I’ll ope my arms;And like the kind life-rendering pelican,Repast them with my blood.If thou didst ever hold me in thy heartAbsent thee from felicity awhile,And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain,To tell my story.But if the while I think on thee, dear friend,All losses are restored and sorrows end.In my school-days, when I had lost one shaft,I shot his fellow of the self-same flightThe self-same way with more advised watch,To find the other forth, and by adventuring bothI oft found both:Love all, trust a few,Do wrong to none:be able for thine enemyRather in power than use, and keep thy friendUnder thy own life’s key:be check’d for silence,But never tax’d for speech.Yield not thy neckTo fortune’s yoke, but let thy dauntless mindStill ride in triumph over all mischance.Not a man in EnglandCan advise me like you:be to yourselfAs you would to your friend.Where you are liberal of your loves and counselsBe sure you be not loose;for those you make friendsAnd give your hearts to, when they once perceiveThe least rub in your fortunes, fall awayLike water from ye, never found againBut where they mean to sink ye.Love thyself last:cherish those hearts that hate thee;Corruption wins not more than honesty.Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace,To silence envious tongues.These violent delights have violent endsAnd in their triumph die, like fire and powder,Which as they kiss consume:the sweetest honeyIs loathsome in his own deliciousnessAnd in the taste confounds the appetite:Therefore love moderately;long love doth so;Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.To beguile the time,Look like the time;bear welcome in your eye,Your hand, your tongue:look like the innocent flower,But be the serpent under’t.…keep you in the rear of your affection,Out of the shot and danger of desire.The chariest maid is prodigal enough,If she unmask her beauty to the moon:Give thy thoughts no tongue,Nor any unproportioned thought his act.Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,Grapple them to thy soul with hoops of steel;But do not dull thy palm with entertainmentOf each new-hatch’d, unfledged comrade.BewareOf entrance to a quarrel, but being in,Bear’t that the opposed may beware of thee.Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice;Take each man’s censure, but reserve thy judgment.Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,But not express’d in fancy;rich, not gaudy;For the apparel oft proclaims the man,And they in France of the best rank and stationAre of a most select and generous chief in that.Neither a borrower nor a lender be;For loan oft loses both itself and friend,And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.This above all:to thine own self be true,And it must follow, as the night the day,Thou canst not then be false to any man.…for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say, the whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness.Be not too tame neither, but let your own discretion be your tutor: suit the action to the word, the word to the action; with this special o’erstep not the modesty of nature: for any thing so overdone is from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold, as ‘twere, the mirror up to nature; to show virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his form and pressure.Have more than thou showest,Speak less than thou knowest,What, in ill thoughts again?Men must endureTheir going hence, even as their coming hither;Ripeness is all:O, beware, my lord, of jealousy;It is the green-eyed monster which doth mockThe meat it feeds on;Therefore, despite of fruitless chastity,Love-lacking vestals and self-loving nuns,That on the earth would breed a scarcityAnd barren dearth of daughters and of sons,Be prodigal:the lamp that burns by nightDries up his oil to lend the world his light.…would thou mightst lie drowningThe washing of ten tides!Spring come to you at the farthestIn the very end of harvest!Look down, you gods,And on this couple drop a blessed crown!Joy, gentle friends!Joy and fresh days of loveAccompany your hearts!Your heart’s desires be with you!I do desire we may be better strangers.Tis pity –What’s pity?That wishing well had not a body in’t,Which might be felt;that we, the poorer born,Whose baser stars do shut us up in wishes,Might with effects of them follow our friends,And show what we alone must think, which neverReturn us thanks.Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!Now, good digestion wait on appetite,And health on both!Hail to thee, lady!And the grace of heaven,Before, behind thee, and on every hand,Enwheel thee round!Well, happiness to their sheets!Farewell, my dearest sister, fare thee well:The elements be kind to thee, and makeThy spirits all of comfort!Let all the number of the stars give lightTo thy fair way!The king’s son have I landed by himself;Whom I left cooling of the air with sighsIn an odd angle of the isle and sitting,His arms in this sad knot.And left thee there;where thou didst vent thy groansAs fast as mill-wheels strike.Misery acquaints a man with strange bed-fellows. …nothing but heart’s-sorrowAnd a clear life ensuing.O jest unseen, inscrutable, invisible,As a nose on a man’s face, or a weathercock on a steeple!Falstaff will learn the humour of the age,He that commends me to mine own contentCommends me to the thing I cannot get.I to the world am like a drop of waterThat in the ocean seeks another drop,Who, falling there to find his fellow forth,Unseen, inquisitive, confounds himself:A wretched soul, bruised with adversity,We bid be quiet when we hear it cry;But were we burdened with like weight of pain,As much or more would we ourselves complain:In faith, lady, you have a merry heart.Yea, my lord;I thank it, poor fool; it keeps on the windy side of care.Well, every one can master a grief but he that has it.A jest’s prosperity lies in the earOf him that hears it, never in the tongueOf him that makes it;This passion, and the death of a dear friend, wouldgo near to make a man look sad.I am never merry when I hear sweet music.O, how full of briers is this working-day world!They are but burs, cousin, thrown upon thee in holiday foolery: if we walk not in the trodden paths our very petticoats will catch them.I could shake them off my coat:these burs are in my heart.O Jupiter, how weary are my spirits!I care not for my spirits, if my legs were not weary.But, O, how bitter a thing it is to look into happiness through another man’s eyes! No profit grows where is no pleasure ta’en:Whose want, and whose delay, is strew’d with sweets,Which they distil now in the curbed time,To make the coming hour o’erflow with joyAnd pleasure drown the brim.Why, he will look upon his boot and sing; mend the ruff and sing;ask questions and sing;pick his teeth and sing. I know a man that had this trick of melancholy sold a goodly manor for a song.What, man! ‘Tis not for gravity to play at cherry-pit with Satan:…it seemed sorrow wept to take leave of them, for their joy waded in tears.Grief fills the room up of my absent child,Lies in his bed, walks up and down with me,Puts on his pretty looks, repeats his words,Remembers me of all his gracious parts,Stuffs out his vacant garments with his form;Yet again, methinks,Some unborn sorrow, ripe in fortune’s womb,Is coming towards me, and my inward soulWith nothing trembles:Each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows,….it would be argument for a week, laughter for a month and a good jest for ever.What doth gravity out of his bed at midnight?…a plague of sighing and grief!It blows a man up like a bladder.Verily,I swear, ‘tis better to be lowly born,And range with humble livers in content,Than to be perk’d up in a glistering grief,And wear a golden sorrow.If you have tears, prepare to shed them now.I am one, my liege,Whom the vile blows and buffets of the worldHave so incensed that I am reckless whatI do to spite the world.And I anotherSo weary with disasters, tugg’d with fortune,That I would set my lie on any chance,To mend it, or be rid on’t.For this relief much thanks: ‘tis bitter cold,And I am sick at heart.‘Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,Nor customary suits of solemn black,Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,Nor the dejected ‘havior of the visage,Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,That can denote me truly:these indeed seem,For they are actions that a man might play:But I have that within which passeth show;These but the trappings and the suits of woe.A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.Good lads, how do ye both?As the indifferent children of the earth.Happy, in that we are not over-happy;On fortune’s cap we are not the very button.When sorrows come, they come not single spiesBut in battalions.You do me wrong to take me out o’ the grave:Thou art a soul in bliss;but I am boundUpon a wheel of fire, that mine own tearsDo scald like moulten lead.It gives me wonder great as my contentTo see you here before me.O my soul’s joy!If after every tempest come such calms,May the winds blow till they have waken’d death!And let the labouring bark climb hills of seasOlympus-high and duck again as lowAs hell’s from heaven!If it were now to die,‘Twere now to be most happy;for, I fear,My soul hath her content so absoluteThat not another comfort like to thisSucceeds in unknown fate.Like to the time o’ the year between the extremesOf hot and cold, he was nor sad nor merry.The April ‘s in her eyes:it is love’s spring,And these the showers to bring it on.‘Tis one of those odd tricks which sorrow shootsOut of the mind.Sorrow on love hereafter shall attend:It shall be waited on with jealousy,Find sweet beginning, but unsavoury end,When, in disgrace with fortune and men’s eyes,I all alone beweep my outcast stateAnd trouble deaf heaven with my bootless criesAnd look upon myself and curse my fate,Hence, bashful cunning!And prompt me, plain and holy innocence!To show our simple skill,That is the true beginning of our end.…a poor virgin, sir, an ill-favoured thing, sir, but mine own; a poor humour of mine, sir, to take that that no man else will: rich honesty dwells like a miser, sir, in a poor house;as your pearl in your foul oyster.For ‘tis the mind that makes the body rich;And as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds,So honour peereth in the meanest habit.My friends were poor, but honest;so’s my love:…and no legacy is so rich as honesty.Cease;no more.You smell this business with a sense as coldAs is a dead man’s nose:but I do see’t and feel’tAs you feel doing thus;and see withalThe instruments that feel.If it be so,We need no grave to bury honesty:There’s not a grain of it the face to sweetenOf the whole dungy earth.By the pattern of mine own thoughts I cut outThe purity of his.Ha, ha!What a fool Honesty is, and Trust, hissworn brother, a very simple gentleman!The purest treasure mortal times affordIs spotless reputation:that away,Men are but gilded loam or painted clay.A jewel in a ten-times-barr’d-up chestIs a bold spirit in a loyal breast.Mine honour is my life;both grow in one:Take honour from me, and my life is done:Send danger from the east unto the west,So honour cross it from the north to south,And let them grapple:O, the blood more stirsTo rouse a lion than to start a hare!By heaven, methinks it were an easy leap,To pluck bright honour from the pale-faced moon,Or dive into the bottom of the deep,Where fathom-line could never touch the ground,And pluck up drowned honour by the locks;…and by his lightDid all the chivalry of England moveTo do brave acts:he was indeed the glassWherein the noble youth did dress themselves:O, while you live, tell truth and shame the devil!What is honour?A word.What is in that word?Honour.What is that honour? Air.A trim reckoning!Who hath it?He that died o’ Wednesday. Doth he feel it?No.Doth he hear it?No. ‘Tis insensible, then. Yea, to the dead.But will it not live with the living?No. Why? detraction will not suffer it.Therefore I’ll none of it. Honour is a mere scutcheon:O gentlemen, the time of life is short!To spend that shortness basely were too long,If life did ride upon a dial’s point,Still ending at the arrival of an hour.Now all the youth of England are on fire,And silken dalliance in the wardrobe lies:Now thrive the armourers, and honour’s thoughtReigns solely in the breast of every man:They sell the pasture now to buy the horse,If we are mark’d to die, we are enowTo do our country loss;and if to live,The fewer men, the greater share of honour.An honest tale speeds best being plainly told.Take the instant way;For honour travels in a strait so narrow,Where one but goes abreast:keep then the path;For emulation hath a thousand sonsThat one by one pursue:if you give way,Or hedge aside from the direct forthright,Like to an enter’d tide, they all rush byAnd leave you hindmost;Every man has his fault, and honesty is his:Set honour in one eye and death i’ the other,And I will look on both indifferently,For let the gods so speed me as I loveThe name of honour more than I fear death.Well, honour is the subject of my story.For Brutus is an honourable man;So are they all, all honourable men –What’s the news?None, my lord, but that the world’s grown honest.Then is doomsday near: Rightly to be greatIs not to stir without great argument,But greatly to find quarrel in a strawWhen honour’s at the stake.The Moor is of a free and open nature,That thinks men honest that but seem to be so,And will as tenderly be led by the noseAs asses are.Reputation, reputation, reputation! O, I have lost my reputation! I have lost the immortal part of myself, and what remains is bestial. My reputation, Iago, my reputation!Who steals my purse steals trash; ‘tis something, nothing;‘Twas mine, ‘tis his, and has been slave to thousands:But he that filches from me my good nameRobs me of that which not enriches himAnd makes me poor indeed.…O wretched fool.That livest to make thine honesty a vice!O monstrous world!Take note, take note, O world,To be direct and honest is not safe.I should be wise, for honesty’s a foolAnd loses that it works for.Nay, but be wise:yet we see nothing done;She may be honest yet.Nay, had she been true,If heaven would make me such another worldOf one entire and perfect chrysolite,I’d not have sold her for it.But why should honour outlive honesty?Let it go all.Why, any thing:An honourable murderer, if you will;For nought I did in hate, but all in honour.The painful warrior famoused for fight,After a thousand victories once foil’d,Is from the book of honour razed quite,And all the rest forgot for which he toil’d:Hence!What cares these roarersfor the name of king?For I am all the subjects that you have,Which first was mine own kingCare not for issue;The crown will find an heir:A sceptre snatch’d with an unruly handMust be as boisterously maintain’d as gain’d;And he that stands upon a slippery placeMakes nice of no vile hold to stay him up:Even so must I run on, and even so stop.What surety of the world, what hope, what stay,When this was now a king, and now is clay?Why uncle, thou hast many years to live.But not a minute, king, that thou canst give:Shorten my days thou canst with sullen sorrow,And pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow;Thou canst help time to furrow me with age,But stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage;Thy word is current with him for my death,But dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath.Not all the water in the rough rude seaCan wash the balm from an anointed king;For God’s sake, let us sit upon the groundAnd tell sad stories of the death of kings;How some have been deposed;some slain in war,Some haunted by the ghosts they have deposed;Some poison’d by their wives:some sleeping kill’d;All murder’d:for within the hollow crownThat rounds the mortal temples of a kingKeeps Death his court;What must the king do now?Must he submit?The king shall do it:must he be deposed?The king shall be contented:must he loseThe name of king? o’ God’s name, let it go:I’ll give my jewels for a set of beads,My gorgeous palace for a hermitage,My gay apparel for an almsman’s gown,My figured goblets for a dish of wood,My sceptre for a palmer’s walking staff,My subjects for a pair of carved saintsAnd my large kingdom for a little grave,A little, little grave, an obscure grave;Or I’ll be buried in the king’s highway,Some way of common trade, where subjects’ feetMay hourly trample on their sovereign’s head;For on my heart they tread now whilst I live;And buried once, why not upon my head?Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere;Nor can one England brook a double reign,Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.O for a Muse of fire, that would ascendThe brightest heaven of invention,A kingdom for a stage, princes to actAnd monarchs to behold the swelling scene!‘Tis not the balm, the sceptre and the ball,The sword, the mace, the crown imperial,The intertissued robe of gold and pearl,The farced title running ‘fore the king,The throne he sits on, nor the tide of pompThat beats upon the high shore of this world,No, not all these, thrice-gorgeous ceremony,Not all these, laid in bed majestical,Can sleep so soundly as the wretched slave,Who with a body fill’d and vacant mindGets him to rest, cramm’d with distressful bread;….the king-becoming graces,As justice, verity, temperance, stableness,Bounty, perseverance, mercy, lowliness,Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude,I have no relish of them,A king of shreds and patches –There’s such divinity doth hedge a king,That treason can but peep to what it would,Acts little of his will.Ay, every inch a king:When I do stare, see how the subject quakes.O Imogen,Thou hast lost by this a kingdom.No, my lord;I have got two worlds by ‘t.By my troth, I’ll go with thee to the lane’s end:if bawdy talk offend you, we’ll have very little of it. Nay, friar, I am a kind of burr;I shall stick.Our court, you know, is hauntedWith a refined traveller of Spain;A man in all the world’s new fashion planted,That hath a mint of phrases in his brain;One whom the music of his own vain tongueDoth ravish like enchanting harmony;I’ll put a girdle round about the earthIn forty minutes.I go, I go;look how I go:Swifter than arrow from the Tartar’s bow.We the globe can compass soon,Swifter than the wandering moon.Ay, now am I in Arden;the more fool I;when I was at home, I was in a better place; but travellers must be content.And your experience makes you sad: I had rather have a fool to make me merry than experience to make me sad; and to travel for it too!Farewell, Monsieur Traveller: look you lisp and wear strange suits, disable all the benefits of your own country, be out of love with your nativity and almost chideGod for making you that countenance you are, or I will scarce think you have swam in a gondola.O mistress mine, where are you roaming?O, stay and hear;your true love’s coming,That can sing both high and low:Trip no further, pretty sweeting;Journeys end in lovers meeting,Every wise man’s son doth know.There lies your way, due west.Then westward-ho! …you may ride’sWith one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ereWith spur we beat an acre.Jog on, jog on, the foot-path way,And merrily hent the stile-a:A merry heart goes all the day,Your sad tires in a mile-a.A course more promisingThan a wild dedication of yourselvesTo unpath’d waters, undream’d shores,…talking of the Alps and Apennines,The Pyrenean and the river Po,I am no pilot;yet, wert thou as farAs that vast shore wash’d with the farthest sea,I would adventure for such merchandise.Her husband’s to Aleppo gone, master o’ the Tiger:But in a sieve I’ll thither sail,And, like a rat without a tail,I’ll do, I’ll do, and I’ll do.Here I have a pilot’s thumb,Wreck’d as homeward he did come.…Is’t far you ride?As far, my lord, as will fill up the time‘Twixt this and supper:go not my horse the better,I must become a borrower of the nightFor a dark hour or twain.By the pricking of my thumbs,Something wicked this way comes.Open, locks,Whoever knocks!Haste me to know’t, that I, with wings as swiftAs meditation or the thoughts of love,May sweep to my revenge.‘Faith, he to-night hath boarded a land carrack:If it prove lawful prize, he’s made for ever.I do not understand.He’s married.Here is my journey’s end, here is my butt,And very sea-mark of my utmost sail.Friends, come hither:I am so lated in the world, that IHave lost my way for ever:O, whither hast thou led me, Egypt?…for so longAs he could make me with this eye or earDistinguish him from others, he did keepThe deck, with glove, or hat, or handkerchief,Still waving, as the fits and stirs of ‘s mindCould best express how slow his soul sail’d on,How swift his ship.The swiftest harts have posted you by land;And winds of all the corners kiss’d your sails,To make your vessel nimble.I’ll make a journey twice as far, to enjoyA second night of such sweet shortness whichWas mine in Britain,That is my home of love:if I have ranged,Like him that travels I return again,I endow’d thy purposesWith words that made them knownYou taught me language;and my profit on’tIs, I know how to curse.The red plague rid youFor learning me your language!Where the devil should he learn our language?….here will be an old abusing ofGod’s patience and the king’s English.I cannot tell what the dickens his name is…Too late?Why, no;I, that do speak a word.May call it back again.He draweth out the thread of his verbosity finer than the staple of his argument.They have been at a great feastof languages, and stolen the scraps.Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing, more than any man in all Venice.Why, cousin!Why, Rosalind!Cupid have mercy!Not a word?Not one to throw at a dog.Answer me in one word.You must borrow me Gargantua’s mouth first: ‘tis a word too great for any mouth of this age’s size.Ay;is it not a language I speak?I will tell you athing, but you shall let it dwell darkly with you.When you have spoken it, ‘tis dead, and I am thegrave of it.…he plays o’ the viol-de-gamboys, and speaks three or four languagesword for word without book, and hath all the good gifts of nature.You speak a language that I understand not.My life stands in the level of your dreams,Which I’ll lay down.Your actions are my dreams;…there was speech in their dumbness, language in their very gesture;they looked as they had heard of a world ransomed, or one destroyed:O, that my tongue were in the thunder’s mouth!Then with a passion would I shake the world;I am a scribbled form, drawn with a penUpon a parchment, and against this fireDo I shrink up.Words pay no debts…Words, words, mere words, no matter from the heart:O Romeo, Romeo!Wherefore art thou Romeo?...….O, be some other name!What’s in a name?That which we call a roseBy any other name would smell as sweet;…those that understood him smiled at one another and shook their heads;but, for mine own part, it was Greek to me.But wherefore could not I pronounce ‘Amen’?I had most need of blessing, and ‘Amen’Stuck in my throat.Give sorrow words:the grief that does not speakWhispers the o’er-fraught heart and bids it break.It is not nor it cannot come to good:But break, my heart;for I must hold my tongue.Words, words, words.Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you, trippingly on the tongue: but if you mouth it, as many of your players do, I had as lief the town-crier spoke my lines.Let me be cruel, not unnatural:I will speak daggers to her, but use none;My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites;My words fly up, my thoughts remain below:Words without thoughts never to heaven go.O, speak to me no more;These words, like daggers, enter in mine ears;No more, sweet Hamlet!Be thou assured, if words be made of breath,And breath of life, I have no life to breatheWhat thou hast said to me.…a knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.His purse is empty already; all’s golden words are spent.The rest is silence.My story being done,She gave me for my pains a world of sighs:She swore, in faith, twas strange, ‘twas passing strange,‘Twas pitiful, ‘twas wondrous pitiful:She wish’d she had not heard it, yet she wish’dThat heaven had made her such a man:she thank’d me,And bade me, if I had a friend that loved her,I should but teach him how to tell my story.And that would woo her.But words are words;I never yet did hearThat the bruised heart was pierced through the ear.Sir, would she give you so much of her lipsAs of her tongue she oft bestows on me,You’ll have enough.Demand me nothing:what you know, you know.From this time forth I never will speak word.But bid farewell, and go:when you sued staying,Then was the time for words:no going then;Eternity was in our lips and eyes,Bliss in our brows’ bent;none our parts so poor,But was a race of heaven:O, learn’d indeed were that astronomerThat knew the stars as I his characters;He’d lay the future open. I, thus neglecting worldly ends, all dedicatedTo closeness and the bettering of my mind…Me, poor man, my libraryWas dukedom large enoughKnowing I loved my books, he furnish’d meFrom mine own library with volumes thatI prize above my dukedom.Look he’s winding up the watch of his wit;by and by it will strike.Well, I am standing water.I’ll teach you how to flow.Do so:to ebbHereditary sloth instructs me.…and I’ll be wise hereafterAnd seek for grace.I have consider’d well his loss of timeAnd how he cannot be a perfect man,Not being tried and tutor’d in the world:Experience is by industry achievedAnd perfected by the swift course of time.Ay,Much is the force of heaven-bred poesy.I had rather than forty shillings I had my Book ofSongs and Sonnets here.He hath studied her well, and translated her will,out of honesty into English.Well, thereby hangs a tale;…unless experience be a jewel;that I have purchased at an infinite rate, and that hath taught me to say this:‘Love like a shadow flies when substance love pursues;Pursuing that that flies, and flying what pursues.’I have a good eye, uncle;I can see a church by daylight.…to be a well-favoured man is the gift of fortune;but to write and read comes by nature.What a pretty thing man is when he goes in his doublet and hose and leaves off his wit!Small have continual plodders ever wonSave base authority from others’ books.How well he’s read, to reason against reading!How hast thou purchased this experience?By my penny of observation.Devise, wit;write, pen;for I am for whole volumes in folio.You two are book-men:can you tell me by your wit what was a month old at Cain’s birth, that’s not five weeks old as yet?Sir, he hath never fed of the dainties that are bred of a book;he hath not eat paper, as it were;he hath not drunk ink: his intellect is not replenished;he is only an animal, only sensible in the duller parts:Have you the lion’s part written?Pray you, if it be, give it me, for I am slow of study.If to do were as easy as to know what were good todo, chapels had been churches and poor men’scottages princes’ palaces.It is a good divine thatfollows his own instructions:I can easier teachtwenty what were good to be done, than be one of thetwenty to follow mine own teaching.….but the full sum of meIs sum of something, which, to term in gross,Is an unlesson’d girl, unschool’d, unpractised;Happy in this, she is not yet so oldBut she may learn;And this our life exempt from public hauntFinds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,Sermons in stones and good in every thing.I would not change it.O noble fool!A worthy fool!Motley’s the only wear.…and in his brain,Which is as dry as the remainder biscuitAfter a voyage, he hath strange places cramm’dWith observation, the which he ventsIn mangled forms.I am here with thee and thy goats, as the most capricious poet, honest Ovid, was among the Goths.O knowledge ill-inhabited, worse than Jove in a thatched house!When a man’s verses cannot be understood, nor a man’s good wit seconded with the forward child Understanding, it strikes a man more dead than a great reckoning in a little room. Truly, I would the gods had made thee poetical.He uses his folly like a stalking-horse and under the presentation of that he shoots his wit.O this learning, what a thing it is!Where did you study all this goodly speech?It is extempore, from my mother-wit.A witty mother!Witless else her son.Of all the learned and authentic fellows,So full of shapes is fancyThat it alone is high fantastical....but I am a great eater of beef and I believe that does harm to my wit.Now you see, sir, how your fooling grows old, and people dislike it.But this is worshipful societyAnd fits the mounting spirit like myself,For he is but a bastard to the timeThat doth not smack of observation;I had rather be a kitten and cry mewThan one of these same metre ballad-mongers;I am not only witty in myself, but the cause that wit is in other men.Nay, the man hath no wit that cannot, from the rising of the lark to the lodging of the lamb, vary deserved praise on my palfrey.So wise so young, they say, do ne’er live long.Love goes toward love, as schoolboys from their books,But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.Was ever book containing such vile matterSo fairly bound?O that deceit should dwellIn such a gorgeous palace!He reads much;He is a great observer and he looksQuite through the deeds of men:Your face, my thane, is as a book where menMay read strange matters.Remember thee!Yea, from the table of my memoryI’ll wipe away all trivial fond records,All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,That youth and observation copied there;And thy commandment all alone shall liveWithin the book and volume of my brain,Unmix’d with baser matter:Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,I will be brief:More matter, with less art.O, there has been much throwing about of brains.I once did hold it, as our statists do,A baseness to write fair and labour’d muchHow to forget that learning, but, sir, nowIt did me yeoman’s serviceMarry, here’s grace and a cod-piece;that’s a wise man and a fool.To do this is within the compass of man’s wit: and therefore I will attempt the doing of it.What should such a foolDo with so good a wife?Well, I perceive he was a wise fellow, and had good discretion, that, being bid to ask what he would of the king, desired he might know none of his secrets:Nor shall Death brag thou wander’st in his shade,When in eternal lines to time thou growest:So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,So long lives this and this gives life to thee.How can my Muse want subject to invent,While thou dost breathe, that pour’st into my verseThine own sweet argument, too excellentFor every vulgar paper to rehearse?Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back?Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?O, none, unless this miracle have might,That in black ink my love may still shine bright.…trudge with it in all haste, and carry it among the whitsters in Datchet-mead, and there empty it in the muddy ditch close by the Thames side.Thou makest the triumviry, the corner-cap of society,The shape of Love’s Tyburn that hangs up simplicity.This way the king will come;this is the wayTo Julius Caesar’s ill-erected tower,To whose flint bosom my condemned lordIs doom’d a prisoner by proud Bolingbroke:…and when I am king of England, I shall command all the good lads in Eastcheap.And givest such sarcenet surety for thy oaths,As if thou never walk’st further than Finsbury.How now, lad! is the wind in that door, i’ faith?Must we all march?Yea, two and two, Newgate fashion.I do remember him at Clement’s Inn like a man made after supper of a cheese-paring: when a’ was naked, he was, for all the world, like a forked radish, with a head fantastically carved upon it with a knife:The rebels are in Southwark;fly, my lord!Jack Cade proclaims himself Lord Mortimer,Descended from the Duke of Clarence’ house,And calls your grace usurper openlyAnd vows to crown himself in Westminster.Now is Mortimer lord of this city.And here, sittingupon London-stone, I charge and command that, of thecity’s cost, the pissing-conduit run nothing butclaret wine this first year of our reign.…now go some and pull down the Savoy;others to the inns of court;down with them all.Up Fish Street!Down Saint Magnus’ Corner!Kill and knock down!Throw them into Thames!We are, my lord;and come to have the warrantThat we may be admitted where he is.Well thought upon;I have it here about me.When you have done, repair to Crosby Place.Towards Chertsey, noble lord?No, to White-Friars;there attend my coming.I do not like the Tower, of any place.Did Julius Caesar build that place, my lord?He did, my gracious lord, begin that place;Which, since, succeeding ages have re-edified.My lord of Ely! ...When I was last in Holborn,I saw good strawberries in your garden thereI do beseech you send for some of them.If you thrive well, bring them to Baynard’s Castle;Where you shall find me well accompaniedWith reverend fathers and well-learned bishops.This is the indictment of the good Lord Hastings;Which in a set hand fairly is engross’d,That it may be this day read over in Paul’s.Not long before your highness sped to France,The duke being at the Rose, within the parishSaint Lawrence Poultney,You must no more call it York-place, that’s past;For, since the cardinal fell, that title’s lost:‘Tis now the king’s, and call’d Whitehall.…..leave your noise anon, ye rascals:do you take the court for Paris-garden?These are the youths that thunder at a playhouse, and fight for bitten apples; that no audience, but the tribulation of Tower-hill, or the limbs of Limehouse, their dear brothers, are able to endure.It was the owl that shriek’d, the fatal bellman,Which gives the stern’st good-night.At the first sightThey have changed eyes.Here’s my hand.And mine, with my heart in’t.Do you love me, master? no?Dearly my delicate Ariel. Sweet lord, you play me false.No, my dear’st love,I would not for the world.Yes, for a score of kingdoms you should wrangle,And I would call it, fair play.I leave myself, my friends and all for love.O, how this spring of love resemblethThe uncertain glory of an April day,Which now shows all the beauty of the sun,And by and by a cloud takes all away!You never saw her since she was deformed.How long hath she been deformed?Ever since you loved her.….though the chameleon Love can feed on the airYet, spaniel-like, the more she spurns my love,The more it grows and fawneth on her still.What!Have I scap’d love-letters in the holiday-time of my beauty, and am I now a subject for them?Of what quality was your love, then?Like a fair house built on another man’s ground; so that I have lost my edifice by mistaking the place where I erected it.Take, O, take those lips away,That so sweetly were forsworn;And those eyes, the break of day,Lights that do mislead the morn:But my kisses bring again, bring again;Seals of love, but sealed in vain, sealed in vain.How many fond fools serve mad jealousy!I shall see thee, ere I die, look pale with love.With anger, with sickness, or with hunger, my lord, not with love: prove that ever I lose more blood with love than I will get again with drinking, pick out mine eyes with a ballad-maker’s pen and hang me up at the door of a brothel-house for the sign ofblind Cupid.O God, sir, here’s a dish I love not:I cannot endure my Lady Tongue.I love you with so much of my heart that none is left to protest.Love is a familiar;Love is a devil:there is no evil angel but Love.On a day, alack the day!Love, whose month is ever May,Spied a blossom passing fairPlaying in the wanton air;For valour, is not Love a Hercules,Still climbing trees in the Hesperides?Subtle as Sphinx;as sweet and musicalAs bright Apollo’s lute, strung with his hair:And when Love speaks, the voice of all the godsMakes heaven drowsy with the harmony.Ay me!For aught that I could ever read,Could ever hear by tale or history,The course of true love never did run smooth;Things base and vile, folding no quantity,Love can transpose to form and dignity:Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind;And therefore is wing’d Cupid painted blind:Nor hath Love’s mind of any judgement taste;Wings and no eyes figure unheedy haste:And therefore is Love said to be a child,Because in choice he is so oft beguiled.Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicityIn least speak most, to my capacity.The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve:Lovers, to bed; ‘tis almost fairy time.But love is blind and lovers cannot seeThe pretty follies that themselves commit;If thou remember’st not the slightest follyThat ever love did make thee run into,Thou hast not loved:Or if thou hast not sat as I do now,Wearying thy hearer in thy mistress’ praise,Thou hast not loved:Or if thou hast not broke from companyAbruptly, as my passion now makes me,Thou hast not loved.We that are true lovers run into strange capers; but as all is mortal in nature, so is all nature in love mortal in folly.‘Was’ is not ‘is:’ besides, the oath of a lover is no stronger than the word of a tapster; they are both the confirmer of false reckonings.…men have died from time to time and worms have eaten them, but not for love.Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy,And what’s her history?A blank, my lord.She never told her love,But let concealment, like a worm i’ the bud,Feed on her damask cheek:she pined in thought,And with a green and yellow melancholyShe sat like patience on a monument,Smiling at grief.Was not this love indeed?We men may say more, swear more:but indeedOur shows are more than will;for still we proveMuch in our vows, but little in our love.Thy tyrannyTogether working with thy jealousies,Fancies too weak for boys, too green and idleFor girls of nine, O, think what they have doneAnd then run mad indeed, stark mad!Prosperity’s the very bond of love,Whose fresh complexion and whose heart togetherAffliction alters.O, let my lady apprehend no fear:in all Cupid’s pageant there is presented no monster.Nor nothing monstrous neither?They say all lovers swear more performance than they are able and yet reserve an ability that they never perform, vowing more than the perfection of ten and discharging less than the tenth part of one.They that have the voice of lions and the act of hares, are they not monsters?Love is a smoke raised with the fume of sighs;Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers’ eyes;Being vex’d a sea nourish’d with lovers’ tears:What is it else? a madness most discreet,A choking gall and a preserving sweet.It is my lady, O, it is my love!And yet I wish but for the thing I have:My bounty is as boundless as the sea,My love as deep;the more I give to thee,The more I have, for both are infinite.Now art thou sociable, now art thou Romeo;now art thou what thou art, by art as well as by nature: for this drivelling love is like a great natural, that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole.Thou hast describedA hot friend cooling:ever note, Lucilius,When love begins to sicken and decay,It useth an enforced ceremony.There are no tricks in plain and simple faith;…wife and child,Those precious motives, those strong knots of love,This is the very ecstasy of love,Whose violent property fordoes itselfAnd leads the will to desperate undertakingsAs oft as any passion under heavenThat does afflict our natures.Nature is fine in love, and where ‘tis fine,It sends some precious instance of itselfAfter the thing it loves.What shall Cordelia do?Love, and be silent.…my heart’s subduedEven to the very quality of my lord:I saw Othello’s visage in his mind,And to his honour and his valiant partsDid I my soul and fortunes consecrate.So that, dear lords, if I be left behind,A moth of peace, and he go to the war,The rites for which I love him are bereft me,And I a heavy interim shall supportBy his dear absence.Excellent wretch!Perdition catch my soul,But I do love thee;and when I love thee not,Chaos is come again.If I do prove her haggard,Though that her jesses were my dear heartstrings,I’ld whistle her off and let her down the wind,To prey at fortune.Avaunt! be gone!Thou hast set me on the rack:I swear ‘tis better to be much abusedThan but to know’t a little.Villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore –But jealous souls will not be answer’d so;They are not ever jealous for the cause,But jealous for they are jealous: ‘tis a monsterBegot upon itself, born on itself.…then must you speakOf one that loved not wisely but too well;Of one not easily jealous, but being wroughtPerplex’d in the extreme;of one whose hand,Like the base Indian, threw a pearl awayRicher than all his tribe;Would they not wish the feast might ever last,And bid Suspicion double-lock the door,Lest Jealousy, that sour unwelcome guest,Should, by his stealing in, disturb the feast?’Take all my loves, my love, yea, take them all;Nay, if you read this line, remember notThe hand that writ it;for I love you soThat I in your sweet thoughts would be forgotIf thinking on me then should make you woe.This thou perceivest, which makes thy love more strong,To love that well which thou must leave ere long.Let me not to the marriage of true mindsAdmit impediments.Love is not loveWhich alters when it alteration finds,Or bends with the remover to remove:Love’s not Time’s fool, though rosy lips and cheeksWithin his bending sickle’s compass come:Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,But bears it out even to the edge of doom.If this be error and upon me proved,I never writ, nor no man ever loved.Two loves I have of comfort and despair,Which like two spirits do suggest me still:The better angel is a man right fair,The worser spirit a woman colour’d ill.I do not seek to quench your love’s hot fire,But qualify the fire’s extreme rage,Lest it should burn above the bounds of reason.The more thou damm’st it up, the more it burns.The current that with gentle murmur glides,Thou know’st, being stopp’d, impatiently doth rage;I think the best way were to entertain him with hope, till the wicked fire of lust have melted him in his own grease.As the ox hath his bow, sir, the horse his curb and the falcon her bells, so man hath his desires;Tell me thy reason why thou wilt marry.My poor body, madam, requires it:I am driven onby the flesh;and he must needs go that the devil drives.Madding my eagerness with her restraint,As all impediments in fancy’s courseAre motives of more fancy;Lechery!I defy lecheryPhysic for’t there is none;It is a bawdy planet, that will strikeWhere ‘tis predominant;This jealousyIs for a precious creature:as she’s rare,Must it be great, and as his person’s mighty,Must it be violent, and as he does conceiveHe is dishonour’d by a man which everProfess’d to him, why, his revenges mustIn that be made more bitter.There may be in the cupA spider steep’d, and one may drink, depart,And yet partake no venom, for his knowledgeIs not infected:but if one presentThe abhorr’d ingredient to his eye, make knownHow he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides,With violent hefts.I have drunk,and seen the spider.…since my desiresRun not before mine honour, nor my lustsBurn hotter than my faith.How the devil Luxury, with his fat rump and potato-finger, tickles these together! Fry, lechery, fry!Lechery, sir, it provokes, and unprovokes;it provokes the desire, but it takes away the performance:…I do know,When the blood burns, how prodigal the soulLends the tongue vows:these blazes, daughter,Giving more light than heat, extinct in both,Even in their promise, as it is a-making,You must not take for fire.…won to his shameful lustThe will of my most seeming-virtuous queen:O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there!….Nay, but to liveIn the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,Stew’d in corruption, honeying and making loveOver the nasty sty –A serving-man, proud in heart and mind;that curled my hair; wore gloves in my cap; served the lust of my mistress’ heart, and did the act of darkness with her;Thou art the thing itself:unaccommodated man is no more but such a poor bare, forked animal as thou art.I pardon that man’s life.What was thy cause?Adultery?Thou shalt not die:die for adultery!No:The wren goes to ‘t, and the small gilded flyDoes lecher in my sight.Let copulation thrive…If the balance of our lives had not one scale of reason to poise another of sensuality, the blood and baseness of our natures would conduct us to most preposterous conclusions: but we have reason to cool our raging motions, our carnal stings, our unbitted lusts, whereof I take this that you call love to be a sect or scion.Blessed pudding! Didst thou not see her paddle with the palm of his hand?Lechery, by this hand;an index and obscure prologue to the history of lust and foul thoughts. They met so near with their lips that their breaths embraced together.I hate not love, but your device in love,That lends embracements unto every stranger.Love comforteth like sunshine after rain,But Lust’s effect is tempest after sun;Love’s gentle spring doth always fresh remain,Lust’s winter comes ere summer half be done;Love surfeits not, Lust like a glutton dies;Love is all truth, Lust full of forged lies.What win I, if I gain the thing I seek?A dream, a breath, a froth of fleeting joy.Who buys a minute’s mirth to wail a week?Or sells eternity to gain a toy?The expense of spirit in a waste of shameIs lust in action;and till action, lustIs perjured, murderous, bloody, full of blame,Mistress, both man and master is possess’d;I know it by their pale and deadly looks:They must be bound and laid in some dark room.Lovers and madmen have such seething brains,Such shaping fantasies, that apprehendMore than cool reason ever comprehends.The lunatic, the lover and the poetAre of imagination all compact:One sees more devils than vast hell can hold,That is, the madman:the lover, all as frantic,Sees Helen’s beauty in a brow of Egypt:The poet’s eye, in fine frenzy rolling,Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven;And as imagination bodies forthThe forms of things unknown, the poet’s penTurns them to shapes and gives to airy nothingA local habitation and a name.Such tricks hath strong imagination,That if it would but apprehend some joy,It comprehends some bringer of that joy;Or in the night, imagining some fear,How easy is a bush supposed a bear!Love is merely a madness, and, I tell you, deservesas well a dark house and a whip as madmen do:andthe reason why they are not so punished and curedis, that the lunacy is so ordinary that the whippersare in love too.Yet I profess curing it by counsel.If you be not mad, be gone;if you have reason, be brief: ‘tis not that time of moon with me to make one in so skipping a dialogue.Why, this is very midsummer madness.More matter for a May morning.Were such things here as we do speak about?Or have we eaten on the insane rootThat takes the reason prisoner?Though this be madness, yet there is method in ‘t. Will you walk out of the air, my lord?Into my grave.Indeed, that is out o’ the air.How pregnant sometimes his replies are! A happiness that often madness hits on, which reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of.I am but mad north-north-west:when the wind is southerly I know a hawk from a handsaw.O, what a noble mind is here o’erthrown!The courtier’s, soldier’s, scholar’s, eye, tongue, sword;The expectancy and rose of the fair state,The glass of fashion and the mould of form,The observed of all observers, quite, quite down!And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,That suck’d the honey of his music vows,Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh;That unmatch’d form and feature of blown youthBlasted with ecstasy:Love!His affections do not that way tend;Nor what he spake, though it lack’d form a little,Was not like madness.This the very coinage of your brain:This bodiless creation ecstasyIs very cunning in.My pulse, as yours, doth temperately keep time,And makes as healthful music:it is not madnessThat I have utter’d:bring me to the test,And I the matter will re-word;which madnessWould gambol from.Mother, for love of grace,Lay not that flattering unction to your soul,That not your trespass, but my madness speaks:They say the owl was a baker’s daughter. Lord, we know what we are, but know not what we may be.….You think I’ll weepNo, I’ll not weep:I have full cause of weeping;but this heartShall break into a hundred thousand flaws,Or ere I’ll weep.O fool, I shall go mad!Lend thy hand,And pluck my magic garment from me.So:Lays down his mantleLie there, my art.I find my zenith doth depend uponA most auspicious star, whose influenceIf now I court not but omit, my fortunesWill ever after droop.Spirits, which by mine artI have from their confines call’d to enactMy present fancies.But this rough magicI here abjure, and, when I have requiredSome heavenly music, which even now I do,To work mine end upon their senses thatThis airy charm is for, I’ll break my staff,Bury it certain fathoms in the earth,And deeper than did ever plummet soundI’ll drown my book.You do yet tasteSome subtleties o’ the isle, that will not let youBelieve things certain.This is as strange a maze as e’er men trod…this thing of darkness IAcknowledge mine.Now my charms are all o’erthrown,And what strength I have’s mine own,Which is most faintBut truer stars did govern Proteus’ birthHis words are bonds, his oaths are oracles,His love sincere, his thoughts immaculate,His tears pure messengers sent from his heart,His heart as far from fraud as heaven from earth.Terms!Names!Amaimon sounds well;Lucifer, well; Barbason, well;yet they are devils’ additions, the names of fiends:But, stay;I smell a man of middle-earth.There’s none but witches do inhabit here;Some devils ask but the parings of one’s nail,A rush, a hair, a drop of blood, a pin,A nut, a cherry-stone;One of these men is Genius to the other;And so of these.Which is the natural man,And which the spirit?I wonder that thou, being, as thou say’st thou art, born under Saturn, goest about to apply a moral medicine to a mortifying mischief. I cannot hide what I am:I must be sad when I have cause and smileat no man’s jests,…to be merry best becomes you;for, out of question, you were born in a merry hour.No, sure, my lord, my mother cried;but then there was a star danced, and under that was I born.Thou almost makest me waver in my faithTo hold opinion with Pythagoras,That souls of animals infuse themselvesInto the trunks of men:no, I was not born under a rhyming planet, nor I cannot woo in festival terms.Over hill, over dale,Thorough bush, thorough brier,Over park, over pale,Thorough flood, thorough fire,I do wander everywhere,Swifter than the moon’s sphere;And I serve the fairy queen,To dew her orbs upon the green.The cowslips tall her pensioners be:In their gold coats spots you see;Those be rubies, fairy favours,In those freckles live their savours:Bless thee, Bottom!Bless thee!Thou art translated.And yonder shines Aurora’s harbinger;At whose approach, ghosts, wandering here and there,Troop home to churchyards:damned spirits all,That in crossways and floods have burial,Already to their wormy beds are gone;For fear lest day should look their shames upon,And we fairies, that do runBy the triple Hecate’s team,From the presence of the sun,Following darkness like a dream,Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie,Which we ascribe to heaven:the fated skyGives us free scope, only doth backward pullOur slow designs when we ourselves are dull.They say miracles are past;and we have our philosophical persons, to make modern and familiar, things supernatural and causeless.What shall we do else?Were we not born under Taurus?Taurus!That’s sides and heart.No, sir;it is legs and thighs.Let me see thee caper; My stars shine darkly over me:the malignancy of my fate might perhaps distemper yoursDoes not our life consist of thefour elements?Faith, so they say;but I think it rather consistsof eating and drinking.There’s some ill planet reigns:My father named me Autolycus;who being, as I am, littered under Mercury, was likewise a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles.O, she’s warm!If this be magic, let it be an artLawful as eating.Look, who comes here!A grave unto a soul;Holding the eternal spirit against her will,In the vile prison of afflicted breath.I have heard you sayThat we shall see and know our friends in heaven:If that be true, I shall see my boy again;…and his pure brain,Which some suppose the soul’s frail dwelling-house,Doth by the idle comments that it makesForetell the ending of mortality.Ay, marry, now my soul hath elbow-room;It would not out at windows nor at doors.Now, now, you stars that move in your right spheres,Where be your powers?The bay-trees in our country are all wither’dAnd meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven;The pale-faced moon looks bloody on the earthAnd lean-look’d prophets whisper fearful change;Rich men look sad and ruffians dance and leap,The one in fear to lose what they enjoy,The other to enjoy by rage and war:These signs forerun the death or fall of kings.I can call spirits from the vasty deep.Why, so can I, or so can any man;But will they come when you do call for them?Hung be the heavens with black, yield day to night!Comets, importing change of times and states,Brandish your crystal tresses in the sky,….Then came wandering byA shadow like an angel, with bright hairDabbled in blood;and he shriek’d out aloud,From forth the fatal loins of these two foesA pair of star-cross’d lovers take their life;O, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you.She is the fairies’ midwife, and she comesIn shape no bigger than an agate-stoneOn the fore-finger of an alderman,…my mind misgivesSome consequence yet hanging in the starsShall bitterly begin his fearful dateWith this night’s revels…O, mickle is the powerful grace that liesIn herbs, plants, stones, and their true qualities:For nought so vile that on the earth doth liveBut to the earth some special good doth give,Nor aught so good but strain’d from that fair useRevolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse:Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied;When beggars die, there are no comets seen;The heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes.When shall we three meet againIn thunder, lightning, or in rain?When the hurlyburly’s done,When the battle’s lost and won.Thy bones are marrowless, thy blood is cold;Thou hast no speculation in those eyesWhich thou dost glare with!Can such things be,And overcome us like a summer’s cloud,Without our special wonder?Round about the cauldron go;In the poison’d entrails throw.Toad, that under cold stoneDays and nights has thirty-oneSwelter’d venom sleeping got,Boil thou first i’ the charmed pot.Double, double toil and trouble;Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.How now, you secret, black, and midnight hags!What is’t you do?A deed without a name.Hell is murky!A mote it is to trouble the mind’s eye.In the most high and palmy state of Rome,A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted deadDid squeak and gibber in the Roman streets:As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,Disasters in the sun;and the moist starUpon whose influence Neptune’s empire standsWas sick almost to doomsday with eclipse:And then it started like a guilty thingUpon a fearful summons.I have heard,The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throatAwake the god of day;and, at his warning,Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,The extravagant and erring spirit hiesTo his confine:It faded on the crowing of the cock.Some say that ever ‘gainst that season comesWherein our Saviour’s birth is celebrated,The bird of dawning singeth all night long:And then, they say, no spirit dares stir abroad;The nights are wholesome;then no planets strike,No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,So hallow’d and so gracious is the time.Angels and ministers of grace defend us!Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn’d,Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell,Be thy intents wicked or charitable,Thou comest in such a questionable shapeThat I will speak to thee:Tis now the very witching time of night,When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes outContagion to this world:I bought an unction of a mountebank,So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,Collected from all simples that have virtueUnder the moon, can save the thing from deathThat is but scratch’d withal:The prince of darkness is a gentleman:Modo he’s call’d, and Mahu.‘Tis true:there’s magic in the web of it:A sibyl, that had number’d in the worldThe sun to course two hundred compasses,In her prophetic fury sew’d the work;The worms were hallow’d that did breed the silk;And it was dyed in mummy which the skilfulConserved of maidens’ hearts.Is this the man?Is’t you, sir, that know things?In nature’s infinite book of secrecyA little I can read.When I consider every thing that growsHolds in perfection but a little moment,That this huge stage presenteth nought but showsWhereon the stars in secret influence comment;Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soulOf the wide world dreaming on things to come,Can yet the lease of my true love control,Supposed as forfeit to a confined doom.The mortal moon hath her eclipse endured,…any strange beast there makes a man:when they will not give a doit to relieve a lamebeggar, they will lay out ten to see a deadIndian.That man that hath a tongue, I say, is no man,If with his tongue he cannot win a woman.Why, I’ll exhibit a bill in the parliament for the putting down of men.Think of that – a man of my kidney.Think of that – that am as subject to heat as butter; a man of continual dissolution and thaw.It was a miracle to scape suffocation.O, what men dare do!What men may do!What men daily do, not knowing what they do!….a sweet-faced man;a proper man, as one shall see in a summer’s day; a most lovely gentleman-like man:There are a sort of men whose visagesDo cream and mantle like a standing pond,And do a wilful stillness entertain,With purpose to be dress’d in an opinionOf wisdom, gravity, profound conceit,As who should say ‘I am Sir Oracle,And when I ope my lips let no dog bark!’God made him, and therefore let him pass for a man.…when he is best, he is a little worse than a man, and when he is worst, he is little better than a beast:A mad-cup ruffian and a swearing Jack,…by my troth, I do now remember the poor creature, small beer.Do you know what a man is? Is not birth, beauty, good shape, discourse, manhood, learning, gentleness, virtue, youth, liberality, and such like, the spice and salt that season a man?…he himself stuck not to call us the many-headed multitude.What things in the world canst thou nearest compare to thy flatterers?Women nearest;but men, men are the things themselves. What wouldst thou do with the world, Apemantus, if it lay in thy power?Give it the beasts, to be rid of the men.Let me have men about me that are fat;Sleek-headed men and such as sleep o’ nights:Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look;He thinks too much:such men are dangerous.I dare do all that may become a man;Who dares do more is none.Ay, in the catalogue ye go for men;As hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs,Shoughs, water-rugs and demi-wolves, are cleptAll by the name of dogs:I hold it fit that we shake hands and part:You, as your business and desire shall point you;For every man has business and desire,Such as it is;What a piece of work is a man! How noble in reason! How infinite in faculty! In form and moving how express and admirable!In action how like an angel!In apprehension how like a god!The beauty of the world!The paragon of animals!And yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust?Man delights not me:How all occasions do inform against me,And spur my dull revenge!What is a man,If his chief good and market of his timeBe but to sleep and feed?A beast, no more.Sure, he that made us with such large discourse,Looking before and after, gave us notThat capability and god-like reasonTo fust in us unused.Howl, howl, howl, howl!O, you are men of stones:Had I your tongues and eyes, I’d use them soThat heaven’s vault should crack.Men should be what they seem;Or those that be not, would they might seem none!‘Tis not a year or two shows us a man:They are all but stomachs, and we all but food;To eat us hungerly,…Nay, we must think men are not gods,Nor of them look for such observancesAs fit the bridal.But you, gods, will give usSome faults to make us men.Where should this music be? i’ the air or the earth?It sounds no more:and sure, it waits uponSome god o’ the island.Sitting on a bank,Weeping again the king my father’s wreck,This music crept by me upon the waters,Allaying both their fury and my passionWith its sweet air:thence I have follow’d it,Or it hath drawn me rather.Full fathom five thy father lies;Of his bones are coral made;This is the tune of our catch, played by the pictureof Nobody.Be not afeard;the isle is full of noises,Sounds and sweet airs, that give delight and hurt not.This will prove a brave kingdom to me, where I shallhave my music for nothing.Except I be by Silvia in the night,There is no music in the nightingale;Who is Silvia? what is she,That all our swains commend her?You have a quick ear.Ay, I would I were deaf;it makes me have a slow heart.Let the sky rain potatoes;let it thunder to the tune of GreenSleevesBut, lest myself be guilty to self-wrong,I’ll stop mine ears against the mermaid’s song.Why, these are very crotchets that he speaks; Note, notes, forsooth, and nothing. Now, divine air!Now is his soul ravished! Is it not strange that sheeps’ guts should hale souls out of men’s bodies?My gentle Puck, come hither.Thou rememberestSince once I sat upon a promontory,And heard a mermaid on a dolphin’s backUttering such dulcet and harmonious breathThat the rude sea grew civil at her songAnd certain stars shot madly from their spheres,To hear the sea-maid’s music.Lock up my doors; and when you hear the drumAnd the vile squealing of the wry-neck’d fife,Clamber not you up to the casements then,Nor thrust your head into the public streetTo gaze on Christian fools with varnish’d faces,Let music sound while he doth make his choice;Then, if he lose, he makes a swan-like end,Fading in music:Tell me where is fancy bred,Or in the heart, or in the head?How begot, how nourished?How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank!Here will we sit and let the sounds of musicCreep in our ears:soft stillness and the nightBecome the touches of sweet harmony.Sit, Jessica.Look how the floor of heavenIs thick inlaid with patines of bright gold:There’s not the smallest orb which thou behold’stBut in his motion like an angel sings,Still quiring to the young-eyed cherubins;Such harmony is in immortal souls;But whilst this muddy vesture of decayDoth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it.Come, ho! and wake Diana with a hymn!With sweetest touches pierce your mistress’ ear,And draw her home with music.It was a lover and his lass,With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,That o’er the green corn-field did passIn the spring time, the only pretty ring time,When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding:Sweet lovers love the spring.To know the cause why music was ordain’d!Was it not to refresh the mind of manAfter his studies or his usual pain?If music be the food of love, play on;Give me excess of it, that, surfeiting,The appetite may sicken, and so die.That strain again! it had a dying fall:O, it came o’er my ear like the sweet sound,That breathes upon a bank of violets,Stealing and giving odour!O, fellow, come, the song we had last night.Mark it, Cesario, it is old and plain;The spinsters and the knitters in the sunAnd the free maids that weave their thread with bonesDo use to chant it:Save thee, friend, and thy music:dost thou live by thy tabor?No, sir, I live by the church.…but one Puritan amongst them, and he sings psalms to horn-pipes.…they call themselves Saltiers, and they have a dance which the wenches say is a gallimaufry of gambols, because they are not in’t;‘Tis strange that death should sing.I am the cygnet to this pale faint swan,Who chants a doleful hymn to his own death,And from the organ-pipe of frailty singsHis soul and body to their lasting rest.The setting sun, and music at the close,As the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last,How sour sweet music is,When time is broke and no proportion kept!So is it in the music of men’s lives.Make all our trumpets speak;give them all breath,Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.The king doth wake to-night and takes his rouse,Keeps wassail, and the swaggering up-spring reels;And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray outThe triumph of his pledge.‘Tis as easy as lying:govern these ventages with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent music.Look you, these are the stops.He is dead and gone, lady,He is dead and gone;At his head a grass-green turf,At his heels a stone.For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.Her clothes spread wide;And, mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up:Which time she chanted snatches of old tunes;As one incapable of her own distress,Or like a creature native and induedUnto that element:but long it could not beTill that her garments, heavy with their drink,Pull’d the poor wretch from her melodious layTo muddy death.…Good night sweet prince:And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest!What did thy song bode, lady?Hark, canst thou hear me?I will play the swan.And die in music. Willow, willow, willow –Moor, she was chaste;she loved thee, cruel Moor;So come my soul to bliss, as I speak true;So speaking as I think, I die, I die.Fear no more the heat o’ the sun,Nor the furious winter’s rages;Thou thy worldly task hast done,Home art gone, and ta’en thy wages:Golden lads and girls all must,As chimney-sweepers, come to dust.You are a fair viol, and your sense the strings;Who, finger’d to make man his lawful music,Would draw heaven down, and all the gods, to hearken:Music to hear, why hear’st thou music sadly?Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy.That time of year thou mayst in me beholdWhen yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hangUpon those boughs which shake against the cold,Bare ruin’d choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.Now I will believeThat there are unicorns, that in ArabiaThere is one tree, the phoenix’ throne, one phoenixAt this hour reigning there.Why, Phaethon – for thou art Merops’ son –Wilt thou aspire to guide the heavenly carAnd with thy daring folly burn the world?For Orpheus’ lute was strung with poets’ sinews,Whose golden touch could soften steel and stones,By the bare scalp of Robin Hood’s fat friar,This fellow were a king for our wild faction!Madam, ‘twas Ariadne passioningFor Theseus’ perjury and unjust flight;and set spurs and away, like three German devils, three Doctor Faustuses.I think you all have drunk of Circe’s cup.This whimpled, whining, purblind, wayward boy;This senior-junior, giant-dwarf, Dan Cupid;Regent of love-rhymes, lord of folded arms,The anointed sovereign of sighs and groans,The words of Mercury are harsh after the songs ofApollo.You that way:we this way.And by that fire which burn’d the Carthage queen,When the false Troyan under sail was seen,The moon shines bright:in such a night as this,When the sweet wind did gently kiss the treesAnd they did make no noise, in such a nightTroilus methinks mounted the Troyan wallsAnd sigh’d his soul toward the Grecian tents,Where Cressid lay that night.They say many young gentlemen flock to him every day, and fleet the time carelessly, as they did in the golden world.Wilt thou have music?Hark!Apollo plays,  And twenty caged nightingales do sing:Dost thou love pictures? we will fetch thee straightAdonis painted by a running brook,And Cytherea all in sedges hid,Which seem to move and wanton with her breath,Even as the waving sedges play with wind.….thee,That art to me as secret and as dearAs Anna to the queen of Carthage was,Where, like Arion on the dolphin’s back,I saw him hold acquaintance with the wavesSo long as I could see.The gods themselves,Humbling their deities to love, have takenThe shapes of beasts upon them:JupiterBecame a bull, and bellow’d;the green NeptuneA ram, and bleated;and the fire-robed god,Golden Apollo, a poor humble swain,As I seem now.…it was thought she was a woman and was turned into a cold fish for she would not exchange flesh with one that loved her: the ballad is very pitiful and as true.Saint George, that swinged the dragon, and e’er sinceSits on his horseback at mine hostess’ door,…let us be Diana’s foresters, gentlemen of the shade, minions of themoon;and let men say we be men of good government, being governed, as the sea is, by our noble and chaste mistress the moon, under whose countenance we steal.O, no, my dream was lengthen’d after life;O, then began the tempest to my soul,Who pass’d, methought, the melancholy flood,With that grim ferryman which poets write of,Unto the kingdom of perpetual night.In characters as red as Mars his heartInflamed with Venus:never did young man fancyWith so eternal and so fix’d a soul.Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim,When King Cophetua loved the beggar-maid!So excellent a king;that was, to this,Hyperion to a satyr;My fate cries out,And makes each petty artery in this bodyAs hardy as the Nemean lion’s nerve.I find thee apt;And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weedThat roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,Wouldst thou not stir in this.The shirt of Nessus is upon me:teach me,Alcides, thou mine ancestor, thy rage:Where souls do couch on flowers, we’ll hand in hand,And with our sprightly port make the ghosts gaze:Dido and her Aeneas shall want troops,And all the haunt be ours.She hath been reading lateThe tale of Tereus;here the leaf’s turn’d downWhere Philomel gave up.I have enough:To the trunk again, and shut the spring of it.Swift, swift, you dragons of the night, that dawningMay bare the raven’s eye!I lodge in fear;Though this a heavenly angel, hell is here.Poor shadows of Elysium, hence, and restUpon your never-withering banks of flowers:Be not with mortal accidents opprest;Pray you, tread softly, that the blind mole may notHear a foot fall:Where the bee sucks. there suck I:In a cowslip’s bell I lie;…when didst thou see me heave up my leg and make water against a gentlewoman’s farthingale? Didst thou ever see me do such a trick?The dozen white louses do become an old coat well; it agrees well, passant;it is a familiar beast to man, and signifies love.Why, then the world’s mine oyster, which I with sword will open.The sense of death is most in apprehension;And the poor beetle, that we tread upon,In corporal sufferance finds a pang as greatAs when a giant dies.She had transform’d me to a curtal dog and mademe turn i’ the wheel.Far from her nest the lapwing cries away:O, she misused me past the endurance of a block;an oak but with one green leaf on it would have answered her;The count is neither sad, nor sick, nor merry, nor well; but civil count, civil as an orange, and something of that jealous complexion.And bid her steal into the pleached bower,Where honeysuckles, ripen’d by the sun,Forbid the sun to enter, like favourites,Made proud by princes, that advance their prideAgainst that power that bred it;When daisies pied and violets blueAnd lady-smocks all silver-whiteAnd cuckoo-buds of yellow hueDo paint the meadows with delight,The cuckoo then, on every tree,Mocks married men;for thus sings he, Cuckoo;Cuckoo, cuckoo:O word of fear,Unpleasing to a married ear!When icicles hang by the wallAnd Dick the shepherd blows his nailAnd Tom bears logs into the hallAnd milk comes frozen home in pail,When blood is nipp’d and ways be foul,Then nightly sings the staring owl, Tu-whit;Tu-who, a merry note,While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.I will roar you as gently as any sucking dove; I will roar you an ‘twere any nightingale.And now they never meet in grove or green,By fountain clear, or spangled starlight sheen,But, they do square, that all their elves for fearCreep into acorn-cups and hide them there.…Met we on hill, in dale, forest or mead,By paved fountain or by rushy brook,Or in the beached margent of the sea,To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind,Yet mark’d I where the bolt of Cupid fell:It fell upon a little western flower,Before milk-white, now purple with love’s wound,And maidens call it love-in-idleness.I know a bank whereon the wild thyme blows,Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows,Quite over-canopied with luscious woodbine,With sweet musk-roses and with eglantine:Even till the eastern gate, all fiery-red,Opening on Neptune with fair blessed beams,Turns into yellow gold his salt green streams.My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind,What, wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice?Pray you, no more of this; ‘tis like the howling of Irish wolves against the moon.Thy hounds shall make the welkin answer themAnd fetch shrill echoes from the hollow earth.O master, master, I have watch’d so longThat I am dog-weary:but at last I spiedAn ancient angel coming down the hill,Will serve the turn.I knew a wench married in an afternoon as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit;The hind that would be mated by the lionMust die for love.The climate’s delicate, the air most sweet,Fertile the isle, the temple much surpassingThe common praise it bears.…but first how the poor souls roared, and the sea mocked them;and how the poor gentleman roared and the bear mocked him, both roaring louder than the sea or weather.Name of mercy, when was this, boy?Now, now:I have not winked since I saw these sights: the men are not yet cold under water, nor the bear half dined on the gentleman: he’s at it now.…there’s rosemary and rue;these keepSeeming and savour all the winter long:Grace and remembrance be to you both,And welcome to our shearing!Yet nature is made better by no meanBut nature makes that mean:so, over that artWhich you say adds to nature, is an artThat nature makes.You see, sweet maid, we marryA gentler scion to the wildest stock,And make conceive a bark of baser kindBy bud of nobler race:this is an artWhich does mend nature, change it rather, butThe art itself is nature.O Proserpina,For the flowers now, that frighted thou let’st fallFrom Dis’s waggon! – daffodils,That come before the swallow dares, and takeThe winds of March with beauty;violets dim,But sweeter than the lids of Juno’s eyesOr Cytherea’s breath;pale primrosesThat die unmarried, ere they can beholdBight Phoebus in his strength – a maladyMost incident to maids;bold oxlips andThe crown imperial;lilies of all kinds,The flower-de-luce being one!O, these I lack,To make you garlands of, and my sweet friend,To strew him o’er and o’er!Walk before toward the sea-side;go on the right hand: I will but look upon the hedge and follow you.To gild refined gold, to paint the lily,To throw a perfume on the violet,To smooth the ice, or add another hueUnto the rainbow, or with taper-lightTo seek the beauteous eye of heaven to garnish,Is wasteful and ridiculous excess.Give you a reason on compulsion! If reasons were as plentiful as blackberries, I would give no man a reason upon compulsion, I.The strawberry grows underneath the nettleAnd wholesome berries thrive and ripen bestNeighbour’d by fruit of baser quality:And so the prince obscured his contemplationUnder the veil of wildness;which, no doubt,Grew like the summer grass, fastest by night,The singing masons building roofs of gold,It must be as it may:though patience be a tired mare, yet she will plod. There must be conclusions.Covering discretion with a coat of folly;As gardeners do with ordure hide those rootsThat shall first spring and be most delicate.Then for the truth and plainness of the case.I pluck this pale and maiden blossom here,Giving my verdict on the white rose side.Prick not your finger as you pluck it off,Lest bleeding you do paint the white rose redAnd fall on my side so, against your will.Now ‘tis the spring, and weeds are shallow-rooted;Suffer them now, and they’ll o’ergrow the gardenAnd choke the herbs for want of husbandry.Gives not the hawthorn-bush a sweeter shadeTo shepherds looking on their silly sheep,Than doth a rich embroider’d canopyTo kings that fear their subjects’ treachery?O, yes, it doth;a thousand-fold it doth.A horse!A horse!My kingdom for a horse!One touch of nature makes the whole world kin,He is their god:he leads them like a thingMade by some other deity than nature,That shapes man better;and they follow him,Against us brats, with no less confidenceThan boys pursuing summer butterflies,Or butchers killing flies.Is the sun dimm’d, that gnats do fly in it?The eagle suffers little birds to sing,And is not careful what they mean thereby,Knowing that with the shadow of his wingsHe can at pleasure stint their melody:At my poor house look to behold this nightEarth-treading stars that make dark heaven light:I have no joy of this contract to-night:It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden;Too like the lightning, which doth cease to beEre one can say ‘It lightens.’ Sweet, good night!This bud of love, by summer’s ripening breath,May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.O flesh, flesh, how art thou fishified!Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.It was the lark, the herald of the morn,No nightingale:look, love, what envious streaksDo lace the severing clouds in yonder east:Night’s candles are burnt out, and jocund dayStands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.It is the bright day that brings forth the adder;And that craves wary walking.I had rather be a dog, and bay the moon,Than such a Roman.This guest of summer,The temple-haunting martlet, does approve,By his loved mansionry, that the heaven’s breathSmells wooingly here:no jutty, frieze,Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this birdHath made his pendent bed and procreant cradle:Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed,The air is delicate.I have done the deed.Didst thou not hear a noise?I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry.We have scotch’d the snake, not kill’d it:…Come, seeling night,Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day;And with thy bloody and invisible handCancel and tear to pieces that great bondWhich keeps me pale!Light thickens;and the crowMakes wing to the rooky wood:Good things of day begin to droop and drowse;While night’s black agents to their preys do rouse.Thrice the brinded cat hath mew’d.Thrice and once the hedge-pig whined.Eye of newt and toe of frog,Wool of bat and tongue of dog,Adder’s fork and blind-worm’s sting,Lizard’s leg and owlet’s wing,He loves us not;He wants the natural touch:for the poor wren,The most diminutive of birds, will fight,Her young ones in her nest, against the owl.Not a mouse stirring.Last night of all,When yond same star that’s westward from the poleHad made his course to illume that part of heavenWhere now it burns…But, look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,Walks o’er the dew of yon high eastward hill:How weary, stale, flat and unprofitable,Seem to me all the uses of this world!Fie on’t!Ah fie! ‘Tis an unweeded garden,That grows to seed;things rank and gross in naturePossess it merely.Ay, springes to catch woodcocks.‘Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,A serpent stung me;so the whole ear of DenmarkIs by a forged process of my deathRankly abused:but know, thou noble youth,The serpent that did sting thy father’s lifeNow wears his crown.The glow-worm shows the matin to be near,And ‘gins to pale his uneffectual fire:Very like a whale.How now!A rat?Dead, for a ducat, dead!Take you me for a sponge, my lord?Ay, sir, that soaks up the king’s countenance, his rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the king best service in the end: he keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw;first mouthed, to be last swallowed:when he needs what you have gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you shall be dry again.There’s rosemary, that’s for remembrance; pray, love, remember:and there is pansies. that’s for thoughts.There’s fennel for you, and columbines: there’s rue for you;and here’s some for me: we may call it herb-grace o’ Sundays: O you must wear your rue with a difference. There’s a daisy: I would give you some violets, but they withered all when my father died: they say he made a good end –There is a willow grows aslant a brook,That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream;There with fantastic garlands did she comeOf crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purplesThat liberal shepherds give a grosser name,But our cold maids do dead men’s fingers call them:Hear you, sir;What is the reason that you use me thus?I loved you ever:but it is no matter;Let Hercules himself do what he may,The cat will mew and dog will have his day.As flies to wanton boys, are we to the gods –They kill us for their sport.That nature, which contemns its origin,Cannot be border’d certain in itself;She that herself will sliver and disbranchFrom her material sap, perforce must witherAnd come to deadly use.But I will wear my heart upon my sleeveFor daws to peck at:I am not what I am.‘Zounds, sir, you’re robb’d;for shame, put on your gown;Your heart is burst, you have lost half your soul;Even now, now, very now, an old black ramIs topping your white ewe.I am one, sir, that comes to tell you your daughter and the Moor are now making the beast with two backs.It is impossible you should see this,Were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys,As salt as wolves in pride, and fools as grossAs ignorance made drunk.‘Tis better playing with a lion’s whelpThan with an old one dying.All come to this?The heartsThat spaniel’d me at heels, to whom I gaveTheir wishes, do discandy, melt their sweetsOn blossoming Caesar;Hast thou the pretty worm of Nilus there,That kills and pains not?I would have broke mine eye-strings;crack’d them, butTo look upon him, till the diminutionOf space had pointed him sharp as my needle,Nay, follow’d him, till he had melted fromThe smallness of a gnat to air, and thenHave turn’d mine eye and wept.but, you know,strange fowl light upon neighbouring ponds.On her left breastA mole cinque-spotted, like the crimson dropsI’ the bottom of a cowslip:And often, to our comfort, shall we findThe sharded beetle in a safer holdThan is the full-wing’d eagle.With fairest flowersWhilst summer lasts and I live here, Fidele,I’ll sweeten thy sad grave:thou shalt not lackThe flower that’s like thy face, pale primrose, norThe azured harebell, like thy veins, no, norThe leaf of eglantine, whom not to slander,Out-sweeten’d not thy breath:the ruddock would,With charitable bill – O bill, sore-shamingThose rich-left heirs that let their fathers lieWithout a monument! – bring thee all this;Yea, and furr’d moss besides, when flowers are none,To winter-ground thy corse.The blind mole castsCopp’d hills towards heaven, to tell the earth is throng’dBy man’s oppression;and the poor worm doth die for’t.Shall I compare thee to a summer’s day?Thou art more lovely and more temperate:Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,And summer’s lease hath all too short a date:Haply I think on thee, and then my state,Like to the lark at break of day arisingFrom sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven’s gate;For thy sweet love remember’d such wealth bringsThat then I scorn to change my state with kings.Full many a glorious morning have I seenFlatter the mountain-tops with sovereign eye,Kissing with golden face the meadows green,Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy;Nor did I wonder at the lily’s white,Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose;They were but sweet, but figures of delight,Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.This island’s mine, by Sycorax my mother,Which thou takest from me.…why, nothing comes amiss so money comes withal.You’re a made old man:if the sins of your youth are forgiven you, you’re well to live. Gold!All gold!This is fairy gold, boy, and ‘twill prove so:up with’t, keep it close:I am a poor fellow, sir.Why, be so still;here’s nobody will steal that fromthee:Bell, book, and candle shall not drive me back,When gold and silver becks me to come on.Well you deserve:they well deserve to have,That know the strong’st and surest way to get.…I’ll give thrice so much landTo any well-deserving friend;But in the way of bargain, mark ye me,I’ll cavil on the ninth part of a hair.You’ll pay me the eight shillings I won of you at betting?Base is the slave that pays.O, I have bought the mansion of a love,But not possess’d it, and, though I am sold,Not yet enjoy’d:so tedious is this dayAs is the night before some festivalTo an impatient child that hath new robesAnd may not wear them.Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks;In the corrupted currents of this worldOffence’s gilded hand may shove by justice,And oft ‘tis seen the wicked prize itselfBuys out the law:Put money in thy purse;follow thou the wars; defeat thy favour with an usurped beard;I say, put money in thy purse.…the other is not a thing for sale, and only the gift of the gods.Farewell!Thou art too dear for my possessing,I’ll deliver all;And promise you calm seas, auspicious galesFor I am that way going to temptation,Where prayers cross.Why should Titania cross her Oberon?I do but beg a little changeling boy,To be my henchman.I will kill thee a hundred and fifty ways:therefore tremble and depart.Sir John stands to his word, the devil shall have his bargain;for he was never yet a breaker of promises: he will give the devil his due.All hell shall stir for this.Mischance and sorrow go along with you!Heart’s discontent and sour afflictionBe playfellows to keep you company!There’s two of you;the devil make a third!And threefold vengeance tend upon your steps!Therefore take with thee my most heavy curse;Which, in the day of battle, tire thee moreThan all the complete armour that thou wear’st!My prayers on the adverse party fight;And there the little souls of Edward’s childrenWhisper the spirits of thine enemiesAnd promise them success and victory.Bloody thou art, bloody will be thy end;Shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend.The common curse of mankind, folly and ignorance, be thine in great revenue!I am hurt.A plague o’ both your houses!The devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon!I have lived long enough:my way of lifeIs fall’n into the sear, the yellow leaf;And that which should accompany old age,As honour, love, obedience, troops of friends,I must not look to have;but, in their stead,Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honour, breath,Which the poor heart would fain deny, and dare not.The fair Ophelia!Nymph, in thy orisonsBe all my sins remember’d.If thou dost marry, I’ll give thee this plague for thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape calumny.How fares our cousin Hamlet?Excellent, i’ faith;of the chameleon’s dish: I eat the air, promise-crammed:you cannot feed capons so.O, my offence is rank it smells to heaven;It hath the primal eldest curse upon’t,A brother’s murder.Pray can I not,Though inclination be as sharp as will:I will have such revenges on you both,That all the world shall – I will do such things –What they are, yet I know not:but they shall beThe terrors of the earth.The south fog rot him!Wherefore weep you?At mine unworthiness that dare not offerWhat I desire to give, and much less takeWhat I shall die to want.I am a tainted wether of the flock,Meetest for death:the weakest kind of fruitDrops earliest to the ground;and so let me…only in the world I fill up a place, which may be bettersupplied when I have made it empty.I am no great Nebuchadnezzar, sir;I have not much skill in grass.I am a woodland fellow, sir, that always loved a great fire; and the master I speak of ever keeps a good fire. But, sure, he is the prince of the world;let his nobility remain in’s court. I am for the house with the narrow gate, which I take to be too little for pomp to enter: some that humble themselves may; but the many will be too chill and tender, and they’ll be for the flowery way that leads to the broad gate and the great fire.But I am weaker than a woman’s tear,Tamer than sleep, fonder than ignorance,Less valiant than the virgin in the nightAnd skilless as unpractised infancy.The seeded prideThat hath to this maturity blown upIn rank Achilles must or now be cropp’d,Or, shedding, breed a nursery of like evil,To overbulk us all.Men’s eyes were made to look, and let them gaze;I will not budge for no man’s pleasure, I.Bow, stubborn knees;and, heart with strings of steel,Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe!….and a gentleman born, Master Parson; who writes himself ‘Armigero’ in any bill, warrant, quittance, or obligation,But man, proud man,Dress’d in a little brief authority,Most ignorant of what he’s most assured,His glassy essence, like an angry ape,Plays such fantastic tricks before high heavenAs make the angels weepArt rich?Faith, sir, so so.‘So so’ is good, very good, very excellent good;and yet it is not;it is but so so. ‘Twere all oneThat I should love a bright particular starAnd think to wed it, he is so above me:Simply the thing I amShall make me live.There’s place and means for every man alive.Dost thou think, because thou art virtuous, there shall be no more cakes and ale?In my stars I am above thee;but be not afraid of greatness: some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon ‘em.Come, boy;I am past more children, but thy sons and daughters will be all gentlemen born.And if his name be George, I’ll call him Peter;For new-made honour doth forget men’s names;Therefore doth heaven divideThe state of man in divers functions,Setting endeavour in continual motion;To which is fixed, as an aim or butt,Obedience:for so work the honey-bees,Creatures that by a rule in nature teachThe act of order to a peopled kingdom.I cannot tell:the world is grown so bad,That wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch:Since every Jack became a gentlemanThere’s many a gentle person made a Jack.I was a pack-horse in his great affairs;A weeder-out of his proud adversaries,A liberal rewarder of his friends:To royalize his blood I spilt mine own.Farewell!A long farewell, to all my greatness!This is the state of man:to-day he puts forthThe tender leaves of hopes;to-morrow blossoms,And bears his blushing honours thick upon him;The third day comes a frost, a killing frost,And, when he thinks, good easy man, full surelyHis greatness is a-ripening, nips his root,And then he falls, as I do.The heavens themselves, the planets and this centreObserve degree, priority and place,Take but degree away, untune that string,And, hark, what discord follows! each thing meetsIn mere oppugnancy:the bounded watersShould lift their bosoms higher than the shoresAnd make a sop of all this solid globe:Strength should be lord of imbecility,And the rude son should strike his father dead:Force should be right;or rather, right and wrong,Between whose endless jar justice resides,Should lose their names, and so should justice too.Then every thing includes itself in power,Power into will, will into appetite;And appetite, an universal wolf,So doubly seconded with will and power,Must make perforce an universal prey,And last eat up himself.‘Tis certain, greatness, once fall’n out with fortune,Must fall out with men too:what the declined isHe shall as soon read in the eyes of othersAs feel in his own fall;for men, like butterflies,Show not their mealy wings but to the summer,I should fear those that dance before me nowWould one day stamp upon me: ‘it has been done;Men shut their doors against a setting sun.But ‘tis a common proof,That lowliness is young ambition’s ladder,Whereto the climber-upward turns his face;But when he once attains the upmost round.He then unto the ladder turns his back,Looks in the clouds, scorning the base degreesBy which he did ascend.Between the acting of a dreadful thingAnd the first motion, all the interim isLike a phantasma, or a hideous dream:The Genius and the mortal instrumentsAre then in council;and the state of man,Like to a little kingdom, suffers thenThe nature of an insurrection.Nay, had I power, I shouldPour the sweet milk of concord into hell,Uproar the universal peace, confoundAll unity on earth.…yield thee, coward,And live to be the show and gaze o’ the time:We’ll have thee, as our rarer monsters are,Painted on a pole, and underwrit,‘Here may you see the tyrant.’But to my mind, though I am native hereAnd to the manner born, it is a customMore honour’d in the breach than the observance.The time is out of joint:O cursed spite,That ever I was born to set it right!There is no ancient gentleman but gardeners, ditchers, and grave-makers: they hold up Adam’s profession.….love cools, friendship falls off, brothers divide:in cities, mutinies; in countries, discord;in palaces, treason; and the bond cracked ‘twixt son and father.There thou mightst behold the great image of authority: a dog’s obeyed in office.We cannot all be masters, nor all mastersCannot be truly follow’d.What, no more ceremony?See, my women!Against the blown rose may they stop their noseThat kneel’d unto the buds.O, see, my women,The crown o’ the earth doth melt.My lord!O, wither’d is the garland of the war,The soldier’s pole is fall’n:young boys and girlsAre level now with men;the odds is gone,And there is nothing left remarkableBeneath the visiting moon.but thou know’st this,‘Tis time to fear when tyrants seem to kiss.They that have power to hurt and will do none,That do not do the thing they most do show,Who, moving others, are themselves as stone,Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow,They rightly do inherit heaven’s gracesAnd thou in this shalt find thy monument,When tyrants’ crests and tombs of brass are spent.Thou dost, and think’st it much to tread the oozeOf the salt deep,To run upon the sharp wind of the north,To do me business in the veins o’ the earthWhen it is baked with frost.A plague upon the tyrant that I serve!I am subject to a tyrant, a sorcerer that by his cunning hath cheated me of the island.– mine own people, mine own people.Are they so?God bless them and make them his servants!O good old man, how well in thee appearsThe constant service of the antique world,Service is no heritage:Being your slave, what should I do but tendUpon the hours and times of your desire?I have no precious time at all to spend,Nor services to do, till you require.Awake, dear heart, awake;thou hast slept well; Awake!This is a strange repose, to be asleepWith eyes wide open;Sometimes a thousand twangling instrumentsWill hum about mine ears, and sometime voicesThat, if I then had waked after long sleep,Will make me sleep again:and then, in dreaming,The clouds methought would open and show richesReady to drop upon me that, when I waked,I cried to dream again.These our actors,As I foretold you, were all spirits andAre melted into air, into thin air:And, like the baseless fabric of this vision,The cloud-capp’d towers, the gorgeous palaces,The solemn temples, the great globe itself,Ye all which it inherit, shall dissolveAnd, like this insubstantial pageant faded,Leave not a rack behind.We are such stuffAs dreams are made on, and our little lifeIs rounded with a sleep.Pray, Master Barnardine, awake till you areexecuted, and sleep afterwards.…she is never sad but when she sleeps, and not ever sad then; for I have heard my daughter say, she hath often dreamed of unhappiness and waked herself with laughing.Swift as a shadow, short as any dream;Brief as the lightning in the collied night,That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth,And ere a man hath power to say ‘Behold!’The jaws of darkness do devour it up:So quick bright things come to confusion.These things seem small and undistinguishable,Like far-off mountains turned into clouds.I have had a most rare vision. I have had a dream, past the wit of man to say what dream it was:If we shadows have offended,Think but this, and all is mended,That you have but slumber’d hereWhile these visions did appear.And this weak and idle theme,No more yielding but a dream,Dreams are toys:Life is as tedious as a twice-told taleVexing the dull ear of a drowsy man;O, who can hold a fire in his handBy thinking on the frosty Caucasus?Or cloy the hungry edge of appetiteBy bare imagination of a feast?Or wallow naked in December snowBy thinking on fantastic summer’s heat?How many thousand of my poorest subjectsAre at this hour asleep!O sleep, O gentle sleep,Nature’s soft nurse, how have I frighted thee,That thou no more wilt weigh my eyelids downAnd steep my senses in forgetfulness?O, I have pass’d a miserable night,So full of ugly sights, of ghastly dreams,That, as I am a Christian faithful man,I would not spend another such a night,Though ‘twere to buy a world of happy days,Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!Thou talk’st of nothing.True, I talk of dreams,Which are the children of an idle brain,Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,Which is as thin of substance as the airAnd more inconstant than the wind, Sleep shall neither night nor dayHang upon his pent-house lid;He shall live a man forbid:Weary se’nnights nine times nineShall he dwindle, peak and pine:Though his bark cannot be lost,Yet it shall be tempest-tost.Methought I heard a voice cry ‘Sleep no more!Macbeth does murder sleep’, the innocent sleep,Sleep that knits up the ravell’d sleeve of care,The death of each day’s life, sore labour’s bath,Balm of hurt minds, great nature’s second course,Chief nourisher in life’s feast.But let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds suffer,Ere we will eat our meal in fear and sleepIn the affliction of these terrible dreamsThat shake us nightly:better be with the dead,Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace,Than on the torture of the mind to lieIn restless ecstasy.Duncan is in his grave;After life’s fitful fever he sleeps well;Treason has done his worst:nor steel, nor poison,Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing,Can touch him further.You lack the season of all natures, sleep.O God, I could be bounded in a nut shell and count myself a king of infinite space, were it not that I have bad dreams.A dream itself is but a shadow.….To die, to sleep;To sleep:perchance to dream:ay, there’s the rub;For in that sleep of death what dreams may comeWhen we have shuffled off this mortal coil,Must give us pause:Why, let the stricken deer go weep,The hart ungalled play;For some must watch, while some must sleep:So runs the world away.But this denoted a foregone conclusion:‘Tis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream.I dream’d there was an Emperor Antony –O, such another sleep, that I might seeBut such another man!O eastern star!Peace, peace!Dost thou not see my baby at my breast,That sucks the nurse asleep?The dream’s here still:even when I wake, it isWithout me, as within me;not imagined, felt.And so I am awake.Poor wretches that dependOn greatness’ favour dream as I have done,Wake and find nothing.Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed,The dear repose for limbs with travel tired;But then begins a journey in my head,To work my mind, when body’s work’s expired:Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter,In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.I have done nothing but in care of thee,Of thee, my dear one, thee, my daughter,I should sinTo think but nobly of my grandmother:Good wombs have borne bad sons.Therefore my son i’ the ooze is bedded, andI’ll seek him deeper than e’er plummet soundedAnd with him there lie mudded.While other men, of slender reputation,Put forth their sons to seek preferment out:Some to the wars, to try their fortune there;Some to discover islands far away;Some to the studious universities.My youngest boy, and yet my eldest care,…it is a wise father that knows his own child.We do not knowHow he may soften at the sight o’ the child:The silence often of pure innocencePersuades when speaking fails.Near or far off, well won is still well shot,And I am I, howe’er I was begot.Zounds!I was never so bethump’d with wordsSince I first call’d my brother’s father dad.My life, my joy, my food, my all the world!My widow-comfort, and my sorrows’ cure!I am a bastard too;I love bastards: I am a bastard begot, bastard instructed, bastard in mind, bastard in valour, in every thing illegitimate. One bear will not bite another, and wherefore should one bastard?Wouldst thou have laugh’d had I come coffin’d home,That weep’st to see me triumph?Ay, my dear,Such eyes the widows in Corioli wear,And mothers that lack sons.Madam, an hour before the worshipp’d sunPeer’d forth the golden window of the east,A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;Where, underneath the grove of sycamoreThat westward rooteth from the city’s side,So early walking did I see your son:My child is yet a stranger in the world;She hath not seen the change of fourteen years,Let two more summers wither in their pride,Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.The earth hath swallow’d all my hopes but she,She is the hopeful lady of my earth:What, you egg!Young fry of treachery!My father, methinks I see my father.Oh, where, my lord?In my mind’s eye, Horatio.But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son – A little more than kin, and less than kind.We shall obey, were she ten times our mother.Why, look you there!Look, how it steals away!My father, in his habit as he lived!Look, where he goes, even now, out at the portal!How sharper than a serpent’s tooth it isTo have a thankless child!My noble father,I do perceive here a divided duty:Give me my robes.I am wild in my beholding.O heavens bless my girl!My heartLeaps to be gone into my mother’s bosom.Thou art thy mother’s glass, and she in theeCalls back the lovely April of her prime:And by that destiny to perform an actWhereof what’s past is prologueThis wide and universal theatrePresents more woeful pageants than the sceneWherein we play in.All the world’s a stage,And all the men and women merely players:They have their exits and their entrances;And one man in his time plays many parts,Is there no respect of place, persons, nor time in you?If this were played upon a stage now, I could condemn it as an improbable fiction.I see the play so liesThat I must bear a part.…Can this cockpit holdThe vasty fields of France?Or may we cramWithin this wooden O the very casquesThat did affright the air at Agincourt?…Is now the two hours’ traffic of our stage;He that plays the king shall be welcome; his Majesty shall have tribute of me;the adventurous knight shall use his foil and target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the humorous man shall end his part in peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose lungs are tickled o’ the sere; and the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt for’t. What players are they?…but there is, sir, an eyrie of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top of question, and are most tyrannically clapped for’t:these are now the fashion, and so berattle the common stages – so they call them –that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goose-quills and dare scarce come thither.The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral, tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or poem unlimited: Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty, these are the only men.I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted;or, if it was, not above once;for the play, I remember, pleased not the million; ‘twas caviare to the general:Good my lord, will you see the players well bestowed?Do you hear, let them be well used;for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the time:after your death you were better have a bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!Is it not monstrous that this player here,But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,Could force his soul so to his own conceitThat from her working all his visage wann’d,Tears in his eyes, distraction in’s aspect,A broken voice, and his whole function suitingWith forms to his conceit?And all for nothing!What’s Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,That he should weep for her?What would he do,Had he the motive and the cue for passionThat I have?He would drown the stage with tearsAnd cleave the general ear with horrid speech,Make mad the guilty and appal the free,Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeedThe very faculties of eyes and ears.Yet I,A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak,Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,And can say nothing;O, it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumbshows and noise: I would have such a fellow whipped for o’erdoing Termagant; it out-herods Herod:pray you, avoid it.O, there be players that I have seen play, and heard others praise, and that highly, not to speak it profanely, that, neither having the accent of Christians nor the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and bellowed that I have thought some of nature’s journeymen had made men and not made them well, they imitated humanity so abominably.Madam, how like you this play?The lady doth protest too much, methinks.No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest;no offence i’ the world.What do you call the play?The Mouse-trap.Marry, how?Tropically. This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna:When we are born, we cry that we are comeTo this great stage of fools:So, on your patience evermore attending,New joy wait on you!Here our play has ending.As an unperfect actor on the stageWho with his fear is put besides his part,What seest thou elseIn the dark backward and abysm of time?O, your desert speaks loud;and I should wrong it,To lock it in the wards of covert bosom,When it deserves, with characters of brass,A forted residence ‘gainst the tooth of timeAnd razure of oblivion.Let fame, that all hunt after in their lives,Live register’d upon our brazen tombsAnd then grace us in the disgrace of death;When, spite of cormorant devouring Time,The endeavor of this present breath may buyThat honour which shall bate his scythe’s keen edgeAnd make us heirs of all eternity.The time when. About the sixth hour; when beasts most graze, birds best peck, and men sit down to that nourishment which is called supper:And then he drew a dial from his poke,And, looking on it with lack-lustre eye,Says very wisely, ‘It is ten o’clock:Thus we may see,’ quoth he, ‘how the world wags:‘Tis but an hour ago since it was nine,And after one hour more ‘twill be eleven;And so, from hour to hour, we ripe and ripe,And then, from hour to hour, we rot and rot;And thereby hangs a tale.’But whate’er you areThat in this desert inaccessible,Under the shade of melancholy boughs,Lose and neglect the creeping hours of time;I pray you, what is’t o’clock?You should ask me what time o’ day:there’s no clockin the forest.Time travels in divers paces withdivers persons.I’ll tell you who Time ambleswithal, who Time trots withal, who Time gallopswithal and who he stands still withal.For ever and a day.Say ‘a day,’ without the ‘ever.’ No, no, Orlando;men are April when they woo, December when they wed:maids are May when they are maids, but the sky changes when they are wives.All yet seems well;and if it end so meet,The bitter past, more welcome is the sweet.…and thus the whirligig of time brings in his revenges.Nine changes of the watery star hath beenThe shepherd’s note since we have left our throneWithout a burthen:time as long againWould be fill’d up, my brother, with our thanks;We were, fair queen,Two lads that thought there was no more behindBut such a day to-morrow as to-day,And to be boy eternal.What’s gone and what’s past helpShould be past grief:Old Time the clock-setter, that bald sexton Time,Old John of Gaunt, time-honour’d Lancaster,O, call back yesterday, bid time return,And thou shalt have twelve thousand fighting men!But thought’s the slave of life, and life time’s fool;And time, that takes survey of all the world,Must have a stop.We have heard the chimes at midnight, Master Shallow.Time hath, my lord, a wallet at his back,Wherein he puts alms for oblivion,A great-sized monster of ingratitudes:Those scraps are good deeds past;which are devour’dAs fast as they are made, forgot as soonAs done:For time is like a fashionable hostThat slightly shakes his parting guest by the hand,And with his arms outstretch’d, as he would fly,Grasps in the comer:welcome ever smiles,And farewell goes out sighing.…the end crowns all,And that old common arbitrator, Time,Will one day end it.Good night, good night!Parting is such sweet sorrow,That I shall say good night till it be morrow.Come what come may,Time and the hour runs through the roughest day.If it were done when ‘tis done, then ‘twere wellIt were done quickly:if the assassinationCould trammel up the consequence, and catchWith his surcease success;that but this blowMight be the be-all and the end-all here,But here, upon this bank and shoal of time,We’ld jump the life to come.How goes the night, boy?The moon is down;I have not heard the clock.What is the night?Almost at odds with morning, which is which.To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow,Creeps in this petty pace from day to dayTo the last syllable of recorded time,And all our yesterdays have lighted foolsThe way to dusty death.Out, out, brief candle!Life’s but a walking shadow, a poor playerThat struts and frets his hour upon the stageAnd then is heard no more:it is a taleTold by an idiot, full of sound and fury,Signifying nothing.Time shall unfold what plaited cunning hides:There are many events in the womb of time which will be delivered.…but, alas, to make meA fixed figure for the time of scornTo point his slow unmoving finger at!….but now I’ll set my teeth,And send to darkness all that stop me.Come,Let’s have one other gaudy night:call to meAll my sad captains;fill our bowls once more;Let’s mock the midnight bell.But wherefore do not you a mightier wayMake war upon this bloody tyrant, Time?When to the sessions of sweet silent thoughtI summon up remembrance of things past,Not marble, nor the gilded monumentsOf princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme;Time doth transfix the flourish set on youthAnd delves the parallels in beauty’s brow,Feeds on the rarities of nature’s truth,And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow:And yet to times in hope my verse shall stand,Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.When I have seen by Time’s fell hand defacedThe rich proud cost of outworn buried age;When sometime lofty towers I see down-razedAnd brass eternal slave to mortal rage;Where, alack,Shall Time’s best jewel from Time’s chest lie hid?When in the chronicle of wasted timeI see descriptions of the fairest wights,And beauty making beautiful old rhymeIn praise of ladies dead and lovely knights,He receives comfort like cold porridge.How use doth breed a habit in a man!O wicked, wicked world!…for they say, if money go before, all ways do lie open.O, what a world of vile ill-favor’d faults looks handsome in three hundred pounds a-year!They say there is divinity in odd numbers, either in nativity, chance, or death.Well, heaven forgive him, and forgive us all!Some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall:O, it is excellentTo have a giant’s strength!But it is tyrannousTo use it like a giant.Thou art not thyself;For thou exist’st on many a thousand grainsThat issue out of dust.for truth is truthTo the end of reckoning.Shall I tell you why?Ay, sir, and wherefore;for they say every why hath a wherefore.For slander lives upon succession,For ever housed where it gets possession.Marry, he must have a long spoon that must eat withthe devil.What need the bridge much broader than the flood?Is’t possible?Sits the wind in that corner?Are you good men and true?All this I see;and I see that the fashion wears out more apparel than the man.Comparisons are odorous;…an two men ride of a horse, one must ride behind.…for it so falls outThat what we have we prize not to the worthWhiles we enjoy it, but being lack’d and lost,Why, then we rack the value, then we findThe virtue that possession would not show usWhiles it was ours.You have too much respect upon the world:They lose it that do buy it with much care:It is no mean happiness therefore, to be seated in the mean: superfluity comes sooner by white hairs, but competency lives longer.The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose.‘All that glisters is not gold;’The ancient saying is no heresy,Hanging and wiving goes by destiny.How far that little candle throws his beams!So shines a good deed in a naughty world.The crow doth sing as sweetly as the lark,When neither is attended;Beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold.…if ladies be but young and fair,They have the gift to know itThe ‘why’ is plain as way to parish church:True is it that we have seen better days,Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much.Why then, can one desire too much of a good thing?Faith, as you say, there’s small choice in rotten apples.He that is giddy thinks the world turns round.And oftentimes excusing of a faultDoth make the fault the worse by the excuse,All places that the eye of heaven visitsAre to a wise man ports and happy havens.Teach thy necessity to reason thus;There is no virtue like necessity.He tires betimes that spurs too fast betimes;An habitation giddy and unsureHath he that buildeth on the vulgar heart.He hath eaten me out of house and home;The man that once did sell the lion’s skinWhile the beast lived, was killed with hunting him.And I have heard it said, unbidden guestsAre often welcomest when they are gone.Men’s evil manners live in brass;their virtuesWe write in water.What, man!More water glideth by the millThan wots the miller of;He jests at scars that never felt a wound.The middle of humanity thou never knewest, but the extremity of both ends:Of your philosophy you make no use,If you give place to accidental evils.Who can be wise, amazed, temperate and furious,Loyal and neutral, in a moment?Things without all remedyShould be without regard:what’s done is done.Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill.…to feed were best at home;From thence, the sauce to meat is ceremony;Meeting were bare without it.It will have blood;they say, blood will have blood:Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell;The night is long that never finds the day.Thou know’st ‘tis common;all that lives must die,Passing through nature to eternity.A double blessing is a double grace,There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.To be, or not to be:that is the question:Whether ‘tis nobler in the mind to sufferThe slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,And by opposing end them?Take these again;for to the noble mindRich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.‘Tis e’en so:the hand of little employment hath the daintier sense.Nothing will come of nothing:speak again.The art of our necessities is strange,That can make vile things precious.….the worst is notSo long as we can say ‘This is the worst.’‘Ay’ and ‘no’ too was no good divinity.We, ignorant of ourselves,Beg often our own harms, which the wise powersDeny us for our good;Some innocents ‘scape not the thunderbolt.To business that we love we rise betime,And go to’t with delight.Be cheerful;wipe thine eyesSome falls are means the happier to arise.I combat challenge of this latten bilbo.Come, shepherd, let us make an honourable retreat;though not with bag and baggage, yet with scrip and scrippage.Your If is the only peacemaker;much virtue in If.To the wars, my boy, to the wars!High-stomach’d are they both, and full of ire,In rage deaf as the sea, hasty as fire.But I remember, when the fight was done,When I was dry with rage and extreme toil,Breathless and faint, leaning upon my sword,Came there a certain lord, neat, and trimly dress’d,Fresh as a bridegroom;and his chin new reap’dShow’d like a stubble-land at harvest-home;….food for powder, food for powder;they’ll fill a pit as well as better:Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more;Or close the wall up with our English dead.In peace there’s nothing so becomes a manAs modest stillness and humility:But when the blast of war blows in our ears,Then imitate the action of the tiger;Stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood,…if the cause be not good, the king himself hath a heavy reckoning to make, when all those legs and arms and heads, chopped off in battle, shall join together at the latter day and cry all ‘We died at such a place;’ some swearing, some crying for a surgeon, some upon their wives left poor behind them, some upon the debts they owe, some upon their children rawly left. I am afeard there are few die well that die in a battle; for how can they charitably dispose of any thing, when blood is their argument? Now, if these men do not die well, it will be a black matter for the king that led them to it; whom to disobey were against all proportion of subjection.And Crispin Crispian shall ne’er go by,From this day to the ending of the world,But we in it shall be remember’d;We few, we happy few, we band of brothers;For he to-day that sheds his blood with meShall be my brother;be he ne’er so vile,This day shall gentle his condition:And gentlemen in England now a-bedShall think themselves accursed they were not here,And hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaksThat fought with us upon Saint Crispin’s day.Grim-visaged war hath smooth’d his wrinkled front;And now, instead of mounting barded steedsTo fright the souls of fearful adversaries,He capers nimbly in a lady’s chamberTo the lascivious pleasing of a lute.Rome and her rats are at the point of battle;Thy head is as full of quarrels as an egg is full of meat,And Caesar’s spirit, ranging for revenge,With Ate by his side come hot from hell,Shall in these confines with a monarch’s voiceCry ‘Havoc,’ and let slip the dogs of war;…Lay on, Macduff,And damn’d be him that first cries, ‘Hold, enough!’We do it wrong, being so majestical,To offer it the show of violence;For it is, as the air, invulnerable,And our vain blows malicious mockery.For ‘tis the sport to have the engineerHoist with his own petard:and ‘t shall go hardBut I will delve one yard below their mines,And blow them at the moon:I’ll be your foil, Laertes:in mine ignoranceYour skill shall, like a star i’ the darkest night,Stick fiery off indeed.A hit, a very palpable hit.Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them.O, now, for everFarewell the tranquil mind!Farewell content!Farewell the plumed troop, and the big wars,That make ambition virtue!O, farewell!Farewell the neighing steed, and the shrill trump,The spirit-stirring drum, the ear-piercing fife,The royal banner, and all quality,Pride, pomp and circumstance of glorious war!Do you triumph, Roman?Do you triumph?Unarm, Eros;the long day’s task is done,And we must sleep.Here’s neither bush nor shrub, to bear offany weather at all, and another storm brewing;I hear it sing i’ the wind:At Christmas I no more desire a roseThan wish a snow in May’s new-fangled mirth;But like of each thing that in season grows.This side is Hiems, Winter, this Ver, the Spring;the one maintained by the owl, the other by the cuckoo.The fold stands empty in the drowned field,And crows are fatted with the murrion flock;The nine men’s morris is fill’d up with mud,And the quaint mazes in the wanton greenFor lack of tread are undistinguishable:The seasons alter:hoary-headed frostsFall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose,And on old Hiems’ thin and icy crownAn odorous chaplet of sweet summer budsIs, as in mockery, set;…like the martlet,Builds in the weather on the outward wall,Even in the force and road of casualty.Here feel we but the penalty of Adam,The seasons’ difference, as the icy fangAnd churlish chiding of the winter’s wind,Which, when it bites and blows upon my body,Even till I shrink with cold, I smile and say‘This is no flattery:these are counsellorsThat feelingly persuade me what I am.’Sweet are the uses of adversity;Under the greenwood treeWho loves to lie with me,And turn his merry noteUnto the sweet bird’s throat,Come hither, come hither, come hither:Here shall he see No enemyBut winter and rough weather.Blow, blow, thou winter wind.Thou art not so unkindAs man’s ingratitude;But with the word the time will bring on summer,When briers shall have leaves as well as thorns,And be as sweet as sharp.We must away;Our wagon is prepared, and time revives us:All’s well that ends well;still the fine’s the crown;Whate’er the course, the end is the renown.When that I was and a little tiny boy,With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,A foolish thing was but a toy,For the rain it raineth every day.When daffodils begin to peer,With heigh! the doxy over the dale,Why, then comes in the sweet o’ the year;For the red blood reigns in the winter’s pale.Sir, the year growing ancient,Not yet on summer’s death, nor on the birthOf trembling winter,What hath this day deserved?What hath it done,That it in golden letters should be setAmong the high tides in the calendar?If all the year were playing holidays,To sport would be as tedious as to work;What wind blew you hither, Pistol?Not the ill wind which blows no man to good.Sweetknight, thou art now one of the greatest men in this realm.Is not their climate foggy, raw and dull,On whom, as in despite, the sun looks pale,Killing their fruit with frowns?This day is called the feast of Crispian:He that outlives this day, and comes safe home,Will stand a tip-toe when the day is named,And rouse him at the name of Crispian.Now is the winter of our discontentMade glorious summer by this sun of York;Who is it in the press that calls on me?I hear a tongue, shriller than all the music,Cry ‘Caesar!’ Speak;Caesar is turn’d to hear.Beware the ides of March.The night has been unruly:where we lay,Our chimneys were blown down;and, as they say,Lamentings heard i’ the air;strange screams of death,And prophesying with accents terribleOf dire combustion and confused eventsNew hatch’d to the woeful time:the obscure birdClamour’d the livelong night:some say, the earthWas feverous and did shake.The air bites shrewdly;it is very cold.It is a nipping and an eager air.No, believe me, ‘tis very cold;the wind is northerly.Who’s there, besides foul weather?…’tis a naughty night to swim in.My salad days,When I was green in judgment:cold in blood,To say as I said then!That time?O times! I laugh’d him out of patience;and that nightI laugh’d him into patience;and next morn,Ere the ninth hour, I drunk him to his bed;Then put my tires and mantles on him, whilstI wore his sword Philippan.Not any, but abide the change of time,Quake in the present winter’s state and wishThat warmer days would come:…then was I as a treeWhose boughs did bend with fruit:but in one night,A storm or robbery, call it what you will,Shook down my mellow hangings, nay, my leaves,And left me bare to weather.For never-resting time leads summer onTo hideous winter and confounds him there;Sap cheque’d with frost and lusty leaves quite gone,Beauty o’ersnow’d and bareness every where:When I do count the clock that tells the time,And see the brave day sunk in hideous night;When I behold the violet past prime,And sable curls all silver’d o’er with white;When lofty trees I see barren of leavesWhich erst from heat did canopy the herd,And summer’s green all girded up in sheavesBorne on the bier with white and bristly beard,Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day,And make me travel forth without my cloak,To let base clouds o’ertake me in my way,O, how shall summer’s honey breath hold outAgainst the wreckful siege of battering days,Give not a windy night a rainy morrow,How like a winter hath my absence beenFrom thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen!What old December’s bareness every where!…and I should do itWith much more ease;for my good will is to it,And yours it is against.As I hopeFor quiet days, fair issue and long life,Hope is a lover’s staff;walk hence with thatAnd manage it against despairing thoughts.Alas, I had rather be set quick i’ the earth and bowl’d to death with turnips!Sir, she came in great with child;and longing,saving your honour’s reverence, for stewed prunes;The miserable have no other medicineBut only hope:I know I love in vain, strive against hope;Yet in this captious and intenible sieveI still pour in the waters of my love,Oft expectation fails and most oft thereWhere most it promises, and oft it hitsWhere hope is coldest and despair most fits.I never thought to hear you speak again.Thy wish was father, Harry, to that thought:As many arrows, loosed several ways,Come to one mark;as many ways meet in one town;As many fresh streams meet in one salt sea;As many lines close in the dial’s centre;So may a thousand actions, once afoot.End in one purpose…Women are angels, wooing:Things won are done;joy’s soul lies in the doing.That she beloved knows nought that knows not this:Men prize the thing ungain’d more than it is:That she was never yet that ever knewLove got so sweet as when desire did sue.This is the monstruosity in love, lady, that the will is infinite and the execution confined, the desire is boundless and the act a slave to limit.Tut, man, one fire burns out another’s burning,One pain is lessen’d by another’s anguish;…The attempt and not the deedConfounds us.Infirm of purpose!Give me the daggers:the sleeping and the deadAre but as pictures: ‘tis the eye of childhoodThat fears a painted devil.‘Gainst nature still!Thriftless ambition, that wilt ravin upThine own life’s means!Nought’s had, all’s spent,Where our desire is got without content:‘Tis safer to be that which we destroyThan by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.O, that this too too solid flesh would meltThaw and resolve itself into a dew!Or that the Everlasting had not fix’dHis canon ‘gainst self-slaughter!Is it your own inclining?Is it a free visitation?‘Sblood, do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe? Call me what instrument you will, though you can fret me, yet you cannot play upon me.Let my disclaiming from a purposed evilFree me so far in your most generous thoughts,That I have shot mine arrow o’er the house,And hurt my brother.Virtue!A fig! ‘Tis in ourselves that we are thus or thus. Our bodies are our gardens, to the which our wills are gardeners:so that if we will plant nettles, or sow lettuce, set hyssop and weed up thyme, supply it with one gender of herbs, or distract it with many, either to have it sterile with idleness, or manured with industry, why, the power and corrigible authority of this lies in our wills.Think’st thou I’ld make a life of jealousy,To follow still the changes of the moonWith fresh suspicions?No;to be once in doubtIs once to be resolved:It makes us, or it mars us;think on that,And fix most firm thy resolution.I would thou grew’st unto the shores o’ the haven,And question’dst every sail:I have no other, but a woman’s reason;I think him so because I think him so.But in what habit will you go along?Not like a woman;for I would preventThe loose encounters of lascivious men:Win her with gifts, if she respect not words:Dumb jewels often in their silent kindMore than quick words do move a woman’s mind.But she did scorn a present that I sent her.A woman sometimes scorns what best contents her.‘Item:She is slow in words.’O villain, that set this down among her vices! To be slow in words is a woman’s only virtue: I pray thee, out with’t, and place it for her chief virtue.‘Item:She is proud.’Out with that too;it was Eve’s legacy, and cannot be ta’en from her.Nay, women are frail too.Ay, as the glasses where they view themselves;Which are as easy broke as they make forms.Women!Help Heaven!Men their creation marIn profiting by them. I will go darkly to work with her.That’s the way;for women are light at midnight.…but till all graces be in one woman, one woman shall not come inmy grace.Rich she shall be, that’s certain;wise, or I’ll none; virtuous, or I’ll never cheapen her;fair, or I’ll never look on her; mild, or come not near me;noble, or not I for an angel; of good discourse, an excellent musician, and her hair shall be of what colour it please God. With a wench. ‘….with a child of our grandmother Eve, a female; or, for thy more sweet understanding, a woman.’From women’s eyes this doctrine I derive:They sparkle still the right Promethean fire;They are the books, the arts, the academes,That show, contain and nourish all the world:….make the doors upon a woman’s wit and it will out at the casement; shut that and ‘twill out at the key-hole;stop that, ‘twill fly with the smoke out at the chimney.And if the boy have not a woman’s giftTo rain a shower of commanded tears,An onion will do well for such a shift,Which in a napkin being close convey’dShall in despite enforce a watery eye.A woman moved is like a fountain troubled,Muddy, ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty;Diana’s lipIs not more smooth and rubious;thy small pipeIs as the maiden’s organ, shrill and sound,And all is semblative a woman’s part.I know thy constellation is right aptFor this affair.….yet they say we areAlmost as like as eggs;women say so,That will say anything.Women will love her, that she is a womanMore worth than any man;men, that she isThe rarest of all women.She’s beautiful, and therefore to be woo’d;She is a woman, therefore to be won.Was’t I!Yea, I it was, proud Frenchwoman:Could I come near your beauty with my nails,I’d set my ten commandments in your face.Was ever woman in this humour woo’d?Was ever woman in this humour won?I’ll have her;but I will not keep her long.….Set them downFor sluttish spoils of opportunityAnd daughters of the game.Frailty, thy name is woman!I have heard of your paintings too, well enough;God has given you one face, and you make yourselves another: you jig, you amble, and you lisp, and nick-name God’s creatures, and make your wantonness your ignorance.For there was never yet fair woman but she made mouths in a glass.Down from the waist they are Centaurs,Though women all above:But to the girdle do the gods inherit,Beneath is all the fiends’;There’s hell, there’s darkness, there’s the sulphurous pit,Burning, scalding, stench, consumption;fie,Fie, fie!Pah, pah!Give me an ounce of civet,good apothecary, to sweeten my imagination:…you are pictures out of doors,Bells in your parlors, wild-cats in your kitchens,Saints in your injuries, devils being offended,Players in your huswifery, and huswives’ in your beds.You rise to play and go to bed to work.A woman’s face with Nature’s own hand paintedHast thou, the master-mistress of my passion;A woman’s gentle heart, but not acquaintedWith shifting change, as is false women’s fashion;Gentle thou art and therefore to be won,Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed;And when a woman woos, what woman’s sonWill sourly leave her till she have prevailed?Cease to persuade, my loving Proteus:Home-keeping youth have ever homely wits.Were’t not affection chains thy tender daysTo the sweet glances of thy honour’d love,I rather would entreat thy companyTo see the wonders of the world abroad,Than, living dully sluggardized at home,Wear out thy youth with shapeless idleness.Though we are justices and doctors and churchmen, Master Page, we have some salt of our youth in us; we are the sons of women, Master Page.Thou hast nor youth nor age,But, as it were, an after-dinner’s sleep,Dreaming on both;He that hath a beard is more than a youth, and he that hath no beard is less than a man: and he that is more than a youth is not for me, and he that is less than a man, I am not for him…but doth not the appetite alter? A man loves the meat in his youth that he cannot endure in his age.A good old man, sir;he will be talking: as they say, when the age is in, the wit is out:I never knew so young a body with so old a head.Let me be your servant:Though I look old, yet I am strong and lusty;For in my youth I never did applyHot and rebellious liquors in my blood,Nor did not with unbashful forehead wooThe means of weakness and debility;Therefore my age is as a lusty winter,Frosty, but kindly:Last scene of all,That ends this strange eventful history,Is second childishness and mere oblivion,Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.…but all’s brave that youth mounts and folly guides.But on us both did haggish age steal onAnd wore us out of act.A young man married is a man that’s marr’d.Let’s take the instant by the forward top;For we are old, and on our quick’st decreesThe inaudible and noiseless foot of TimeSteals ere we can effect them.What is love? ‘tis not hereafter;Present mirth hath present laughter;What’s to come is still unsure:In delay there lies no plenty;Then come kiss me, sweet and twenty,Youth’s a stuff will not endure.Here’s flowers for you;Hot lavender, mints, savoury, marjoram;The marigold, that goes to bed wi’ the sunAnd with him rises weeping:these are flowersOf middle summer, and I think they are givenTo men of middle age.You’re very welcome.Now he thanks the old shepherd, which stands by like a weather-bitten conduit of many kings’ reigns.Your lordship, though not clean past your youth, hath yet some smack of age in you, some relish of the saltness of time;If ye will needs say I am an old man, you should give me rest. I would to God my name were not so terrible to the enemy as it is:I were better to be eaten to death with a rust than to be scoured to nothing with perpetual motion.…not muchUnlike young men, whom Aristotle thoughtUnfit to hear moral philosophy:Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet;For you and I are past our dancing days:Care keeps his watch in every old man’s eye,And where care lodges, sleep will never lie;But where unbruised youth with unstuff’d brainDoth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign:…for they say an old man is twice a child.You cannot call it love;for at your ageThe hey-day in the blood is tame, it’s humble,And waits upon the judgment:O heavens!Is’t possible a young maid’s witsShould be as mortal as an old man’s life?Not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing, nor so old to dote on her for any thing: I have years on my back forty eight.Pray, do not mock me:I am a very foolish fond old man,Fourscore and upward, not an hour more nor less;And, to deal plainly,I fear I am not in my perfect mind.…for I am declinedInto the vale of years –Tell him he wears the roseOf youth upon him;from which the world should noteSomething particular:To me, fair friend, you never can be old,For as you were when first your eye I eyed,Such seems your beauty still.